
AUDIO: Mark Stavish - Hacking Egregores (Pt. 1 of 2: Watching the Watchers)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=irYr2-jCNvk

Greetings from the north and welcome to Forum Borealis. Today we pursue a subject we've touched in passing in several shows, namely the phenomenon known as a Gregory. These are non-physical entities arising from a group of people psychologized as group minds that in metaphysical aspects can become externalized in psychic or even physical manifestations.

These collective thought forms not only are produced by the common factors of a group but also influences it back through a mutual feedback loop from their symbiotic relationship. Since the notion pops up in so many different contexts, it is time to understand its depths so we can understand its place in the world of mysteries. To help us get through this, we speak with esotericist and author of the only anglophone book about it, Mark Stavish.

Now, full disclosure, as odd listeners of my show already know because I exposed it in Gordon White's Roon Soup interview with me, decades ago as a young man, I joined our mark which is an acronym for Ancient and Mystical Order Rosa Crutches. This is one of many neurosecretion groups out there, this one particularly famous for being American albeit with French roots and the largest of its ilk and probably also the one with the best spiritual education.

Although I am referring to the old armor which is not the same entity as the new one today, seeing as there was a famous power battle where a majority of the grand masters, which is the title for the leader of national jurisdiction, colluded to oust their then imperator, which is the title for the international head, Gary Stewart. The new head of Ormock who revised its contents became Christian Bernard, a Frenchman and son of a former French Grandmaster Roy Moon Bernard, who is also known within Templar traditions and incidentally initiator to Timothy Hogan whom I've had on my show before as a guest.

Incidentally, Mark Stavish was also a member back in the day. I used to discuss with him, mind you, on the pseudonym which I always apply in all public relations in my life including pen name for my own writings. Anyway, just due to this fact alone, we couldn't help ourselves and naturally at some point had to go full geek into armor and some of its historic and cultural aspects.

Although such an inside baseball segment may be a turn-off for some, others may find it interesting for the same reason. It often is interesting being a fly on the wall when two insiders discuss something. Fortunately, it's not so exclusive that you can't follow the thread and for those of you who are members of any spiritual group, be that raw secretion or otherwise, it's always going to be educating to extract lessons from similar experiences.

So with that caveat in place, let's introduce our guest, Mark Stavish. He is born and raised in Pennsylvania which is fitting seeing as huge groups of Pietist exiles from Europe's royal secretion and alchemical circles settled there back in the day. He's a lifelong student of esotericism with over 35 years experience in comparative religion, philosophy, psychology, and mysticism with emphasis on the traditional western esotericism.

He first studied at Wilkes University between 81 and 83, graduating with a BA in Communications. He moved on to King's College between 83 and 86 where he graduated with a BA in Theology. Between 89 and 91, he studied at Rhode Island College where he took a Masters in Counseling emphasizing psychospiritual modalities and psychosynthesis, graduating in 93.

Professionally, Mark has over 15 years experience in the social service and non-profit fields and has trained hundreds of social service workers, law enforcement personnel, and mental health care providers in areas related to new and emerging religions. He set up his own practice already in 87 and has worked as a freelance author, writer, and lecturer ever since.

But his main day job which lasted from then and up to 12 was as a consultant helping individuals, businesses, and organizations identify their needs, find solutions, and implement changes to achieve their goals. Stavish worked as an addiction counselor for Edgehill Incorporated in Rhode Island between 1993. Between 91 and 93, he worked for New England Holistic Association in their public relations committee.

Between 93 and 95, he was case records manager for GR2 Through Door Center. Between 96 and 97, he worked both for the Times Leader as well as for the Indiana Press. Between 2004, he worked as Development Coordinator for Saint Michael's School. Between 08 and 10, he worked with Advanced Composition General Education and Adjunct Faculty at ITT Technical Institute.

And from 09, he also started working as a teacher at the University of Scranton where he to this day is educating students in public speaking. His personal interests are photography, book collecting, and traveling. Among his esoteric studies has been decades in the Royal Secretion Order Armor where he served as Regional Monitor, Lodge Master, and Secretary.

The traditional Martinis Daughter and the Alchemical School Philosophers of Nature where he served as Regional Director. He also served as Director of Research for the Occult Research and Applications Project Aura, a statistically based research wing of the Pawn performed with detailed exploration into the validity and practicality of various traditional esoteric methods.

This original research was published in the organization's journal, The Stone. He is the founder and director of studies for the Institute of Hermetic Studies as well as for the Louis Claude De Sant Martin Fund, a non-profit dedicated to advancing the study and practice of western esotericism. Mark is also the author of the long-running esoteric blog called Vox Hermes.

His articles have appeared in academic, speciality, and mass market publications specializing in spiritual studies and his major publications focusing on new and emerging religions has resulted in consultation and on-air appearances as well as for news and documentary production. Some print article dealing with spirituality including History Channel, Discover Channel, AE, BBC, The New York Times, Coast to Coast AM, Just Energy Radio, Animal Planet, and the TV documentary series The Haunted.

Apart from being a frequent lecturer on ancient occult knowledge, he is also author of almost 30 books in seven languages on a wide variety of esoteric or cult mystical and spiritual topics like alchemy, Kabbalah, meditation, Freemasonry, ritualism, lucid dreaming, and astral projection and is listed as a notable writer in Who's Who. Welcome to Forum Borealis, Mark. Well, thank you, it's a pleasure to be here.

Pleasure to have you for two reasons, I have to say. Number one, I think you're the only one who ever wrote a book on a Gregoris and number two, we used to be in touch decades ago, I believe. So you know, both of us were a member of Armor back in the day, that's how I discovered. Oh yes, and it's so funny to finally have you here on my show, speaking with you directly. We've been corresponding, yeah, in other regards we don't have to go into details about that, but uh, kind of the circle is complete now, I think that's good.

Okay, so beware, this is a conversational interview, so if you if you trigger my enthusiasm, I may give a round of myself. That's fine, I mean listeners are used to it, not all new guests are, so it's it's not necessarily going to be a one-liner with a lecture in reply. I may have a reasoning, I might challenge you with a difficult question, whatever, but you know, you can handle it, no problem. Sure thing, yeah.

Okay, so um, yeah, I see that you've been very active, made much more books than I first pursued. Um, yeah, yeah, I'm having the Aggregora book in mind of course. But can you confirm by the way that you are the only one who has written a book about Agri-Gorge? Well, you know, I, I think so, I, I've tried to follow that up. I believe there may have been a book in French prior to mine but I haven't been able to get a copy of it so I don't know what it says and no one has spoken to me about it.

However, since my book came out, Aggregors, the occult entities that watch over human destiny and here's the plug, it's in English, German, and Hungarian, probably a few more on the way, I believe that the term has become more popular. We've seen it in in in more literature and in popular usage and I think that some books have come out uh using Amazon as my my source of intelligence there. So I think we can say a qualified yes to that, I, I may be the only person who's written a book on Egregors, right, at least maybe one that's worth reading.

Yeah, yeah, no, I mean if there's another one of course it would be in French, French or Greek is what I would expect. But it's not just yet that you see this and I guess you actually stumble into it because if you have a mercantile mind, this is a step of genius because as this term or this understanding will grow and people get more and more familiar. I mean my listeners already know all about it, not all about it, they know about it and I see that other people too in the podcast world are starting to get familiar.

So I think your book will be the go-to book, it will be the standard because most people don't have access to the sources we had access to where we encountered it. So this will become the book and I think in 10 years from now, it's probably be the best-selling book you have. But it's not just that, that it's a stroke of genius if you were mercantile about it which I believe you weren't, you just wrote it because you felt it and you can explain this that you felt it was deserved.

But it's also that the book is actually good and there's no guarantee, it's not a guarantee that you have an obscure topic book that is good but I have to say yours is. So yeah, so you can tell me first of all how you came about writing about it. Well, that's just it, yeah, I was sitting in the Lost Dog Cafe in Binghamton, New York with Jocelyn Godwin who I'm sure most of your listeners are familiar with and I just off the cuff said to him, you know, I'm thinking about writing a monograph on Edgar Gross.

And you know the idea was a monograph, I was thinking it was just going to be a small book for a specialty audience, wasn't anything in particular. And he said, well jokingly said, well thank God because if you don't, I'll have to. And because this is a topic that he and I would talk about often, particularly the more recent discussion was around Peter Mark Adams' book, The Game of Saturn, who some of your listeners may be familiar with but other aspects of Vega Gore's as well.

So I went home and I had notes already put together and of course as you know, we've had access to different information and I just started writing the book and it wrote itself so nicely. It was like a conversation as if you and I were just sitting down here and I was explaining to you or you were explaining to me the nature of these things with different examples.

So when the manuscript was finished, it didn't really have clear-cut chapters as you normally see in a book. We kind of had to artificially insert chapter breaks in there around topics. And it was, you know, like the baby bear's porridge as we say, it was just right. You know, I wanted to put more information in but I couldn't find a good way to do that easily and I thought it wouldn't fit and if it doesn't fit, you know, it ruins the flow.

And it's just a nice-sized book, it's kind of the perfect size to introduce you to the topic and once introduced to the topic, you can begin to extrapolate the details for yourself out of it. You don't need me to hold your hand and walk you through all the details, it's very self-explanatory once you've read it.

So the manuscript was then sent off to Inner Traditions and Jocelyn had already read it, I believe at that point. And they had said, well, you know, we'll accept it because we can only send this, there's only two people we know that are qualified to judge this book and one of them already read it. So, you know, they accepted it and I was thrilled, they're great folks to work with by the way.

And then it just took off and it took off for a lot of reasons. So you're already seeing it take off, I see. Yeah, it took off, it just and it continues to. I mean, I've done more, I made one decision with that book that I didn't do with others and that is that I would accept every interview offer I was given, no on it because you thought it would be so few.

Yeah, I just thought, you know, we'll just do it, we'll just do it and see how it goes. But part of it, I believe, has to do with the events of 2020 as well and things that went along around that. People were trying to understand how collective consciousness and collective influences work and the book describes that quite precisely in two ways.

One is the traditional way which we think are very important and I include you in that when I say we because we have that background. And also a more modern perspective which we would see in terms of just collect a more psychological perspective but they are not separate.

No, but what's the evidence of 2020 or referring to Covid? Well, just Covid but everything around it in terms of what do we believe, you know, the realization that the media is inherently dishonest. Yeah, and I worked in media, I tell people, I said, I've been on more shows than most people have ever known about, I've done more interviews, I've interviewed people, I do all this stuff, reporters will tell me things and I'll tell you, listen, they lie and they're dishonest for a variety of reasons and people just don't want to believe it.

Absolutely, absolutely. But I think that's, I mean, the only new thing is that so many people are aware of it. I mean, lies have been where the deceit has been the name of the game since Cain. But now people are aware and that's a very interesting situation. So we'll see, we can get more into those things later.

I want to start off by what you just touched, okay, because in my view, there's been three, I would say, I was first going to say two approaches to Aggregora but I'm really seeing three. The one approach we could probably call them magical which is let's say like where they look at a Gregoris as creatures or entities, I guess, um, figuring often in especially medieval and ancient kind of magic, not not Tear G but more like um, what you could call it, dream or Arse and stuff like that.

Then you have probably what you call the psychological which is and you even devote a chapter to the Secretion approach so yes, they are representative of that which is more like no, it's the, it's like a collective thought forms of everything, it's like defusing the actions, feelings, and thoughts of let's say all the members of the organization.

And then you have a third, I would say, perspective which is where I think um, Spencer Lewis, I think he encountered this term in Europe among the more obscure esoteric groups there and they have something in between. It's more like it is something that's created by consciousness but it's also something that lives on its own and it's something that can be, I, I guess Tulpa in the Eastern tradition is pretty similar.

And if you remember Down Fortune's self biography where she, have you read that, Psychic Self Defense, you probably have. Yeah, remember when she had this encounter with the wolf, she was very young, she was in this mystery school and and she created inadvertently, she created this creature that was running havoc, biting people in the night in this house and she had to take it back by dragging it by its silver cord.

And when she reintegrated it with her, she was overwhelmed by feelings of of fear and hate and all that stuff. And that's, I, I think it can also be said to be a Gregory. So I have to make people from the outset aware of how diverse perspectives are on this and I, me, I hope I'm not asking too much when I expect you to make sense of this and try to weave it into a coherent understanding which means that I'm not just asking you to be to describe it phenomenologically, I'm actually asking you to make a philosophical judgment call on this phenomenon.

Well, you know, you gave three descriptions and in the book and in other interviews, I've, I've blended two of those together, uh, within the context of the book just to make it easier. And we'll look at the first one, uh, this is a psychological view and it does not have any metaphysics attached to it and this would be the notion of that we see in advertising, how do we get people thinking, acting, acting really is what we want, what we don't care what they think, we care what they do and that needs to be understood that Aggregors are a social control mechanism.

And I take that term from Jacques Valet in reference to the UFO phenomena which we're seeing a lot of supposed reports about recently in the last year, year and a half. Yeah, and within that framework, aggregators are a limitation, their limiting device because like anything, you need limits. That's without limits that nothing exists so these limitations can be healthy or unhealthier or neutral. For the most part, it's what we make of them. However, some groups clearly have very definite boundaries based upon their goal. The organization exists for a purpose and that organization isn't just physical but it's metaphysical as well.

But we're going to talk just about a corporate and I take that as bodily view that most people would think of. So they go through life and they really don't think much beyond the sensory input. And so you have advertising can be very influential on them and advertising of all sorts by the way. Suggestion is what we're looking at, the power of suggestion here and that creates a commonality of view, common out of purpose, comedy of action and that forms an aggregator and that can be on the family level all the way up to the national level or to some degree world level.

Okay, yeah, I would say a very good example is when you go to a football match, a stadium filled with people, you have two clashing aggregors. Exactly, exactly that and that's just a great example because I talk a lot about sports. You know, the power of the sports agriculture. I mean, I'm in Pennsylvania and we have Penn State University and there's bumper stickers that say that if God isn't a Penn State fan, why is the sky blue and white, right? And it's kind of funny but you know, they've just turned it into a religion because when they say Penn State, they don't mean the academics, they mean Penn State football. Is that implied?

So we have that aspect and then we have the other aspect where we there's a metaphysical view which you've hinted at which is which Harvey Lewis, however, Spencer Lewis with them work was aiming towards and where the collective energy of the members formulate a view. Now the problem there, including dead members, that has to be added. Yes, yes, including dead members. However, it's an in terribly anthropo and anthroposophic view, anthropomorphic excuse me, anthropomorphic view because it's really only concerned with this notion of human and what constitutes humanity.

Now they did involve Amor, did involve what they called their cosmic masters to some degree as well. Yeah, so there was that extra element too. But then when we go beyond that, we have this more classical notion which involves the gods. You know, what are these gods, what are these deities and we begin to recognize that within this cosmos, there's a whole lot of sentient beings as the Buddhists would say that we're not really even familiar with.

So what are these angels, what are these demons, what are these elementals, what are these gods, these demigods, these Asuras, all of these invisible intelligences and forces because at that point they're the same thing, energy or force and intelligence are synonymous at that point. How are they interacting and how are we interacting with them and what are these channels of interaction and those channels of interaction form the aggregator and whatever people are in it, entities are in it, consciousnesses are in it.

And then how do they interrelate between the physical world down here and the so-called psychic metaphysical or spiritual worlds is as far as that may go but whatever that happens to be, whatever that limit is. This is super interesting because a very big question is whether they are. You know, I had Anthony Pique on recently and he's a fan of yours. Okay, he said he suggested that Jins, an example of these creatures, are made of plasma. Now, yes, whether that's true or not, the point is then they have an objective existence outside of my mind.

But if these phenomenons, even if they can have a life of their own, they can be objective but within this human mind as you suggested if their psychological phenomena, there may be entities moving about inner psyche but they're still limited just to a psyche. But if they are made of plasma, they are outside our body, they are, they would exist independent of if I exist or not or if I'm aware of them or not. And I think that's a very crucial question. Are they entities out there, they just vibrating in the ranges of the electromagnetic expected that we cannot directly sense with a limited perception range, right?

Or are they limited to our consciousness and either as a mere psychological phenomenon like probably Armor would say or even they can be, you know, they can take on a mind of their own but they still are operating within our psychology. I think that's a very big question and I, I of course, I don't expect us to, you know, finally solve it here and now but what's your thought about this?

Well, it's always the point of transition. You know, the notion is is that within the metaphysical domain our thoughts are things and that they have a potentiality of concretizing, solidifying to a degree that as do we would say, you know, they're a kind of matter. And we have a problem in Western esotericism, the way we deal with the elements, especially in Western magic where it talks about spirit. You know, there's earth, air, fire, water, and spirit but spirit is seen as something other.

The reality is spirit is a form of matter, it's a very, very subtle matter and you see that well explained within Indian Tantra in Indian alchemy and in Vajrayana but we have that kind of separation, we need to recognize that it's a form of very subtle mental matter if you will. And that anything in duality is a form of matter and duality is very subtle until we go, until we're no longer dealing with duality or correct.

So even though it is a of something which has form which has an aspect of time space to it just that on those levels time space is so very different from what we experience here, you know, we call it spiritual. So within that framework, our thoughts are not even limited to within the domain of we'd say Malcuth, our thoughts are actually in Yesod already but they just come and go and you know, they're like mayflies, they don't last very long or so bubbles, they pop.

So through occult practices or simply through rumination and obsession, we can formulate a thought form that then what does that do, that acts as a link, a conduit, a mechanism wherein we temporarily transcend whatever those limits are and it becomes a vehicle for like attracting like, whether that be good, bad or indifferent, for these more objective forces to inhabit. That's why we have the problems of obsession or even possession, there's different kinds of possession or obsession.

And the reality is that there's a lot of things out there. I mean, we're barely aware of the various microorganisms that exist in our eyebrows or our gut let alone the various, we'll call them different organisms that exist in the psychic dimension. So when we have these focal points that the mind, any visualization that we do, any ritual which is a form of visualization even if we're not doing it as we do it, that emotional focus creates a conduit to link us as individuals or a group of individuals in that unified action to a mirror-like force and intelligence that is greater and more potent and more refined than we are at that moment in order to create a relationship with it thereby in some way benefiting both of us and that can happen unconsciously as well.

Let me dumb it down a little here because what I infer from this is that if we can create, if we create, you know, the mind is super powerful, we all know that and we've been told this by the ancient and all traditions say it. And I often said, excuse me, that if you really want to control a person, forget force, forget bribe, seduction, extortion, anything, nothing is as powerful as taking away his memory. If you can take away someone's memory when they wake up, you can make them believe anything.

Yeah, and on a collective level, this is also true. So we see that power structures in history has always tried to cease the collective memory, whether it be the Third Reich, should it be the Catholic Church or whatever, we're giving the narrative or the media today, corrupt media today, oligarch media, we are giving the narrative and whether it's intended or not, the sum result will be that if we are created in God's image, you know, basically what it really says in the scripture is the Creator created small creators.

Now if this is true and we have this huge power which is used in magic etc then obviously controlling people's having some driving the narrative and making sure that people are not using their mind outside of the overtone window is kind of a black magic actually. And you can then direct people's focus and stuff will be created from that. Now if we can break free from that like the idea in magic and we can actually manipulate energy with our mind then yes, we can create vehicles that even entities not related to us like you implied entities can take these vehicles and use them.

And maybe later we can also get back to their body of light, body of fire, diamond body gear you've talked about we had to create to survive reincarnation. That's very interesting is radiated too. But here's my point, here's my question. So if we can create these things, look at our modern zeitgeist and look at the UFO phenomenon. I mean, couldn't that partly explain something like this?

Well, I think when we, you know, first look at the notion of memory let me just address that because what makes human beings unique among many life forms is that on this planet is that we have memory. And from memory, we can imagine, we can recreate and recombine ideas from the past into a projection into the future.

And it's always fascinating that you know when people talk about manipulation they mentioned the Third Reich as if you know somehow it mattered. It dissolved in 12 and a half years but let's look at communism when communism has done far more damage. And I bring that out simply to point out how we are directed unconsciously. We have habituated ourselves to almost ignore those crimes. And that's really important because this is there you see within communism truly the beginning of year zero.

I mean it truly wanted to wipe out everything prior to it far more than the manipulations of maybe Catholicism in some respects. But I mean that's not really important but the point is it's an easy to see example of just killing everybody off and this is year zero, this is the beginning all over again in every communist regime. So this is a reality that what you've pointed out and it's very easy to see even today at this moment.

So we look at all and then we can look at any other regime if we want to as well. The, you know, any other political regime, it's easy to see that. So that notion of what constitutes history, what constitutes memory is very important because then it creates a context. Of course, communism excelled at that of creating a context in which and because look, it created walls to keep its people in it.

It created context in which the owning of various records, you know that is record albums okay, various types of media was forbidden. That it was controlling the narrative and the context repeatedly repealed repeatedly. And um yeah but hang on it didn't do you know the difference is that the Nazis tried to revise history, you know the politics sure they did that's my point.

Well, I'm sure but so so did communism in its own way by trying by killing people off and right and by just by through its notion they had different approaches to it but it was still the same thing. Yeah, is we will control your mind and in my mind given just that one lasted longer than the other we need to look at why was that. Why was this one able to last longer than the other and what was its success in that controlling of the mind and controlling of the, its own zeitgeist, its own popular consciousness.

So we look at that, we can you know we look at these successes and failures and we can stay on the political aspect of the religious aspect but at the end of the day we have to free ourselves. And that's what we're talking about, how do we free ourselves from these aggregators, these focal points. Well, governments are very good and as are religions and corporate entities of any kind, it doesn't really matter of creating new ways to focus our attention and distract us.

And UFOs are a wonderful example of that because they're an unknown and we can speculate all we want about them but the fact is we simply don't know and we'll probably never know. Again Jacques Valet was clear about that that you don't get all the information you only get bits and pieces of it. There's very good information, there's very bad information, there's disinformation, there's many groups and forces at play.

It's not a simple us or them or a handful, it's a variety of agendas are at work. Now John did we state it back in the days of the Fosters of Nature that and he was probably taking some of his lead from Valet is that the goal of many of some groups at least was to focus so much attention on this UFO phenomena that it would actually solidify. And that you would have this kind of projection solidify of a UFO or UFOs and that this then would be the new mechanism that people who then were in contact with as the term goes the space brothers if you will would then become the new intermediaries.

But between humanity and the space brothers and of course his view was and having gone through the Nazi period the occupation of France he had stated that you know these people would even be worse than the Nazis. And you know he's not throwing this around loosely like we would hear the words today and that's why I bring that up. So he didn't trust the UFO phenomena, he didn't trust it. He very much and he saw it as a form of mass manipulation because we see how easy it is to get people caught up in it.

And I think that when we look at what goes on today with the massive amount of media around the paranormal and what it focuses on and how what of poor quality it is that we see a lot of psychic energy, a lot of emotional energy being directed at a handful of topics one of which is UFOs. And of course, we see more of it now in the media so-called releases and nothing ever happens. The memory isn't there, the history, the memory isn't there, people don't know that this is the same thing that's being said for 70 years, it doesn't change.

But obviously our interpretation of it will change according to our zeitgeist. And I think both Jung and Valet very very early out indicating because my question wasn't as much about the youth as being a distraction as could they be a creation of our collective mind. And I believe Jung touched that aspect of you. Of course, UAP is anything so it's you know it's a diverse phenomenon.

But the interesting part of UAPs, the parts that there's a disclosure, amazingly I never expected that in my lifetime but there is a current disclosure going on even Obama has come clean about it. I don't know for what, I mean they want to be ahead of the narrative for whatever reason but bottom line we're talking about those energetic, objective number one, energy number two and number three not human in the meaning of they are not created deliberately by our government or our corporations.

And they number four they have features that are I guess you could call it paranormal like breaking all laws of physics. Now Jung, Jung's perspective, he kind of dragged the archetypes into this in a way he's talking about aggregors but Valet more interesting. He said explicitly I think it's in Messengers of Deception he said that when he did his thorough analysis of the phenomenon and proved what you cited earlier that whatever they are all of them cannot be, they cannot be vehicles, spacecrafts from wherever, it doesn't fit when you see his analysis.

And he also is pointed out that they seem to be interacting with our expectation and they seem to be somehow related to our collective minds like he call it a control system, a natural control system either from Earth or from humans. And that's kind of that it has been no focus on that almost. And I think I think it's timely now that the concept of aggregors is known that we should also allow ourselves to speculate that there could be a relationship there because if we can create with our minds objective phenomena, what is more, what is more objective phenomena than UAP. So UFOs, comment.

Well, I think that that's the critical point is that we're seeing this occur now and just the notion of synchronicity suggests a relationship because there is you know in synchronicity there's levels of complexity that we don't particularly see. Yeah, that are there, they're undercurrents. And it's goes in line with what we see in terms of the media obsession and with that even streaming medias whether it be Netflix or Amazon Prime or whatever with the amount of paranormal shows that are taking place.

The obsession with paranormal esotericism in different levels even if the shows only run for two three years and go but we see them you know they keep coming back. So uh and we see it on a more complex level than before the themes of the shows involve more precision uh a certain and greater degree of accuracy and I use that word loosely. Yeah, becoming more adult is true, yes more in to some degree more adult.

I wouldn't necessarily say they're more adult, I would simply say they're more attentive to the information level of their audience. You know so that when you see a movie I didn't see it, I didn't watch the show but I heard it was fairly funny. They show these two guys sitting in a lodge and they're at the bar in the watch and behind it are these very nice images and they're authentic, they're real images. You know and so they're using the language that they expect or they're using the language that their viewers expect them to use so they're more in tune with their viewers.

They don't necessarily know if they're more adult and I'm making a clear distinction on that for some very specific reasons because we still see contemporary occultism particularly in the paranormal research areas when we'll say ghosts and UFOs and psychic phenomena that kind of thing is still terribly infantile on adolescenty. But really modern esotericism is still widely influenced far more than it likes to admit by popular culture.

There is a bit of a feedback loop there as I just mentioned but still it receives more impact from popular culture rather than I think popular culture is impacted by it. Right yeah because yeah the expectation is that the occult the esoteric is influencing culture but like you pointed out in the show you sent me. What was the let's give a shout out to his podcast what was it called again? Venus Rising yeah by Eric Simkins.

Yeah, you two guys made a huge point out of that in modern esotericism especially the should we say the esoteric aspect of modern esotericism the current culture is influencing that and we were lamenting certain phenomenons in modern esotericism before we started the show and I think you're right. I think that's a result of that adolescent level being imposed back upon us so that when new people come into like you know in the old days people came into esotericism either from academia or from religion or from parapsychology.

Today huge groups of people are coming in from stuff like New Age and from you know a role game is that what it's called computer games live action role playing right yeah stuff like that right and so you already have a theater element and you have a modern culture element in it and that obviously has to influence has to format you know new generations right so they will be the representatives is what I'm saying.

Yeah well and we can tell by and then this of course forms an aggregator right and when we are a collective view so when we look at contemporary esotericism as a whole in general and we are generalizing here there will always be exceptions that needs to be very clear but we see increasingly the role of the internet in access of information which means perceptions of how people relate to that information how they relate to so-called content producers rather than teachers okay or instructors.

How they relate to their relationship or commitment to it when the people involved we see a change in the even in the publishing industry it is a publishing industry first and foremost and look occultism has always been involved in publishing and let's not pretend there wasn't industrial and commercial aspects to this there have been historically across cultures it's just a matter of who was paying for it okay and how it was financed because all of these things have required financing and those that don't have a high level of financing often tend to be very small and we never hear about them.

And to some degree I have to question that because then how really influential is it how meaningful is it. I mean AMWARK was criticized heavily because it advertised but it created a framework for people for generations it created a gateway and a lot of people knew other people through that gateway yeah so there's there there's something to be said from being known you need an outer face an outer gateway so that said but if your relationship is primarily through publishing there's that mercurial aspect again mercurial and the mental aspect and that has a tendency but we see in practices for people to stay in their own head to stay in their own ideas to be again like mercury.

So the maturation level tends to often be in that framework that's where we see a lot of snarkiness you know we wrote a monograph called Pathology of the Sublime you know that this process is one of inner inner growth and affirmation and expression which means you need to learn how to play well with others and when I see these esoteric groups I can't play well with others um we're we're not seeing maturity and we talked before the show about some of the scoundrels that we know in common well scoundrels have always been there but at the same time that's a mercurial aspect as well.

How do you develop the qualities of discrimination to begin to recognize you know is this a good choice is this a healthy choice you know are they are they keeping their promises is there clarity in the communication or is there deception going on all of this is part of the path regardless of which way you go but what we're seeing is a tremendous amount of it going on within the current framework.

Yeah but you forget to mention that when we are in this little detour then we should also admit that modern groups has taken a different modern esoteric groups is different from before but yeah before I mean today they are so commercial I mean everybody is creating their own group and most of them are done by I guess we can also come clean about you having done this but you're having a focus on the work and many of those who have a publishing relation to it they are just having it as a theoretical thing a philosophical thing they're not doing anything.

So kudos to your group and we're going to get back to that later your school I would say but many of the groups I hesitate you know let me name some I'll not name a specific which but in Golden Dawn for example you see huge egos you see huge commercial interests and that didn't used to be the thing especially back in the day when they tried to stay under the radar and I think I think yes there's like let's say AMORC or the Masons for that matter they do a good job in making people aware there's something out there and there's something to be said for having that access channel I agree.

But then you can talk about levels and I think that the best groups the best mystery schools still in existence are those who didn't change how they operate because in in a true if you're gonna if you're gonna separate from the zeitgeist in esoterica there's a big point of being timeless and then there's no you know there's a New Age notion that now all the rules of previous times are invalid and there's something special about today and everything has to change now no no nothing new under the sun of course everything changes all the time that is correct.

But those who practice and there's not many and even if there were many you wouldn't know about them because they practiced traditionally those who do practice traditionally they are working at the deeper level where the attention of the masses is irrelevant is my point okay so I believe it's all good I believe in need groups that are smaller but working deeper and it has to be like that you can never have you can never make the entire nation Dr. Philos even in academia the higher up you go the fewer people it becomes doesn't just a natural way of how life and and stuff works.

Yes and so it would be the same in esoterica and then you have of course groups that say okay we're not going to work traditional in the form of working under the radar we're going to be a part of the open site coast and there you will have good stuff and you will have bad stuff good stuff would be like uh you know the Institute of Noetic Sciences or like your let's just give it a shout out yours is called the Institute for Hermetic Studies right which is kind of like the one I just mentioned just for esoterica in my view so it's all good.

But back to egregorus I think that UFOs UAPs may be a modern manifestation parts of it at least you know in the old days you got it Charmander's would see stuff Joe Rogan has made a big point of this androgens and what they see Crowley IVOS so well known looks like a gray so but our site cost is mechanical is technological and why wouldn't there be then energy creatures out there for surpassing American Air Force and thereby becoming a matter of concern even for those who have no spiritual thought in their mind that's my point about gregors in the universe.

Well that well that raises well that raises the question um of what uh what is this and what dimension are they coming from and uh if they are coming from uh an alternate dimension which let's use the word astral plane of some kind it's you know adjacent to ours there's no reason to believe that they don't have some level of technology if we look at the legends around the Asuras you know the demigods that ward with the gods in in Indian mythology there's the kind of technology if we look at the uh Solomonic literature of Goethe expression we see that these fallen angels are listed as having instructed humanity in technology on different levels and different types of technology which means they had to have had it or at least understood it or at least understood it when it were operated on this side of the doorway if you want to call it that rather than veil.

It may not be coming from anywhere and that may be the more terrifying part. It's not coming from outer space, it's coming from a different dimension, that interdimensional aspect. And whatever that means, whatever that means. This is the problem with this. We wrote a little bit about that in one monograph, the Mind of Hermes, when we talked about visionary phenomenon that occurs. It occurs, I'm telling you, this is not theory in that monograph, it is experientially directed.

Many of your members are listeners who are familiar with some of the practices that we talked about in AMERK back in the day but also with some of the organizations we talked about before the interview started. They are familiar with this kind of visionary light experiences, these different visions of light that occur. These are not simply an aspect of light which we think of, oh it's light like a light bulb, but the light is energy. There's an energy there and there's heat and that means there's a form of matter taking place.

So we're having a densification of energy in different ritual phenomena and in different spagyrics. It was reported back when AMERK used to have its old alchemy classes that the salts of the spagirix at sometimes could have different flashing colors to them. So this phenomena has to be treated within a context of broader study that we don't see happening and that's because the agrigores get in the way.

The agrigore of many of these esoteric groups, they're too good to look at the research of some of the psychic phenomena that took place like at school in England or the SAURAT group in the United States where they've had the longest running met psychokinetic phenomena for decades there that's been recorded. They get phenomena that would make many magical lodges weep. They're too good for that and at the same time these people doing psychic research are incapable of grasping a lot of the framework and the tradition that goes behind esoteric studies. They don't think it's worth their time.

But look at Dean Raiden, he's gone completely the opposite way. He started from that, I kind of know, he's going full into magic, acknowledging it. Well, I would question that because I read his book Real Magic and any references to magic and that were an afterthought. That was a marketing afterthought. Because I read the book, they were probably found in 10 minutes or less on Wikipedia. At least he dared entertain, open up to that notion. He didn't dare entertain, that was his publisher, really. Wow, that was a marketing afterthought.

But wait a minute, wait a minute, he's doing the rounds, the media rounds, he's giving tutors to magic. There of course he is because it's probably, it's what sells. And at the same time, you see that same organization trying to copyright terminology. There's some very interesting aspects there where they try to own Newton's certain terms that have been around for decades. You see them with trademarks on them. But that's again the formation of the agrigore. How do you escape that and it's a tricky process.

So you know we have some very good groups that can help you get you through into the gateway beyond one agrigore to another. It's a transition process, you work your way through that and you try to separate out. And then of course the notion that you pointed out which is very important is what is the role of the popular mind and popular perception. And that there are some very good groups out there that work in privacy and silently on their own for the benefit of their members and others. But that we don't have, again going against the popular notion, these aren't democratic entities, that there's no, you don't have a right to them.

No, good points and again that's a that's where political correctness comes in and I've stated very emphatically, I mean it's just a, it's a vile abomination because it implies so many things that are fundamentally false. It's counter-initiatic. It goes against tradition. Tradition tends to be fairly conservative. It doesn't talk about rights, it talks about obligations and then your prerogatives as earned when you've shown that you can fulfill your obligations, not your right.

And this goes in how to, how our terms manipulated, how our terms used and how we attempt to. It's the same in academia, you don't have a right to a failure doctor degree. There are institutions that have to be structured in certain ways. I think it really depends on how much do they take into account the people they're working with, inputs. Because you can say, see look at freedom. It's the same with the notion of freedom. What is really freedom? Are we free in democracies? There are some democracies that can be more unfree than enlightened tyranny's if you see what I mean.

So yeah that's, it's an entirely different philosophical ballgame you're entering now. But let me steer us. But that philosophy is in the mindset right and ultimately an aggregator is a mindset. That's my point. It's ultimately a view and that view then creates the boundaries within which we act and react. And that's the point too, it's act and react rather than response. A reaction is habituated patterns.

So if you are in a certain, you know and I've seen this within Tibetan Buddhist groups particularly western converts because you know when you convert to something you really have to abandon everything that went before it which means you have to view it as almost of no value or limited value. So you see this notion of wanting to adopt wholesale a new culture, not a view, a culture. And this is why so many of them have powerful aggregators. Not only that but because of the entities which they're involved with, those are powerful entities.

Yeah, so all of this is, is that framework that you know kind of talking about you know what is an aggregator. It's often very subtle. It doesn't necessarily have to be. I mean in its crudest form you know it because you know, you know it because the limits are very strongly there for you. But in its most subtle form, I think it's most dangerous. Manipulation and stuff. But you mentioned the east, what about Tulpa, is that an equivalent?

No, because an aggregator is a collective thought form. A Tulpa is a magical elimination and it's related to Tolka as a magical projection. But the just ideas, it's a thought form which you create and can't take on a certain life of its own if you're not careful. But every thought form we create can take on a life of itself. That's my point. So couldn't an aggregator then just be our collection of Tulpas? Yes, that would be correct.

But remember not every tool, every thought form isn't an aggregator because your desire to get a new car and you visualize this, you know I really need a new car. The one that doesn't really involve bringing other people in and controlling them or limiting their sphere of action over an extended period of time. When we think of aggregors, it's really best to think in terms of big picture stuff, religion, politics, philosophy, even esotericism and larger within their philosophical business structures because those are all Jupiterian.

Yeah, so aggregates tend to be on some level a little more Jupiterian even if they're small like aggregors like a family. I think in terms of families, a good example would be like the Kennedys. That's a perfect example. Yeah, perfect example of an agriculture. Yeah, another example maybe I want to hear what you think about it. I was talking with my friend and colleague Alex Aquiris of the excellent podcast Skeptical. He should really interview her too. Is Skeptical taken from of course the ancient, nothing to do with pseudoscepticism and debunkers. It's to do with the ancient Skepticals.

Anyway, when we talked, we came into, we were talking about evil, that old problem, philosophical show and we kind of went into the concept of Satan and realized eventually that Satan actually may be an aggregator. I mean Satan in the modern sense of the word like how people imagine that concept to be. Thoughts? Oh, I think that's true. I mean and that's the problem isn't it that when we deal with the notion of evil there is a tendency to be very clumsy about it. There is either this notion of well there's really no such thing as evil there's just ignorance.

Yeah, but you better be willing to stake a lot on that. Okay and then there's this notion of this is good and this is evil, very clear-cut, we're almost clear-cut. And again with any concept there's subtleties, there's gradations to it, there's a hierarchy to evil just as a hierarchy to good and it's a very dangerous hierarchy to contemplate as many as as we discussed in the book on aggregators who discuss that the problems of contemplating it but we have to, to some degree, we have to be able to distance ourselves to begin to handle that problem.

So people will create these clumsy notions around evil and I think Satan is a good example. You know what is Satanism, what is evil and it's just a very clumsy construct that prevents us from really addressing the complexities of ignorance in terms of error and wrongdoing but also willful destruction, a joy in the injury which is what we would call evil. Even that, even though that's deeply rooted in ignorance, it's still something one has to be careful about how they're going to deal with it.

And again, I worked in social services, I've worked with people who were criminals, we murderers. Okay, when we're going to talk about the notion of evil, there's many people in the occultism today have very naive notions about humanity that are deeply rooted in the excessive exuberance and optimism of the human potential movement of the 60s and 70s and they don't really grasp at times the vast variety of types of human possibilities that are out there, some of which are really not in their best interest, people who do not have their best interest at hearts.

And it goes across the spectrum because you know when you have to look at reality as it is, which is what separating out from agrigores are and what enlightenment is, enlightenment is seeing reality as it is, that has some very terrifying aspects. And one of those realities is the visions that we see going back to the book in the writings of H.P. Lovecraft, there are just some aspects of the universe that are terribly horrifying and we see that mentioned in the classical text as well.

You know the warnings from the Chaldean Oracles, you know don't, that we see repeated, mimicked, I don't say mimic but echoed in the statements of the Golden Dawn, you know don't stoop down and stare into those waters for too long, be careful about that, those astral waters. Yet at the same time, how do we deal with that and manage our own becoming, our own awakening and experience some joy and happiness in life as well.

But let's, if you go to the etymology and I want you to actually explain the etymology and then you will see that it also has relations to deeper stuff. Some of this stuff is known even in popular culture thanks to people like Zakaria Sitchin and but you also have like you point out in your book, you also have traditional stuff like the Book of Enoch and there it kind of conflicts again with UFOs but in another way.

You know this modern ancient alien notion that oh they are physical beings and they came from somewhere, these watchers, and so it all conflates with a new inner culture if you take the really big definition of a culture where we throw in stuff like sacrificial and the Nephilims and all that, it's been, it's become a new kind of fashion to look at it as creatures from another planet subduing humans. So I guess we have to go there.

So let's just start with you, you know start with okay where did the world come from, what does it actually mean and what's your view on the ancient inputs on this. The where does the word, what egg regardless or or yeah no you mean, you know it's watchers and what are these watchers.

And I think one of the problems is when we look at the modern literature we're dealing with theoretical aspects rather than practical. That is the people making these connections of UFOs to the Nephilim, they're not doing ceremonial magic, they're not doing, release that we're not being told of it in the literature and for the most part, I don't think they are. We're not seeing people who are highly skilled in any of the psychic arts so their notion may be correct to some degree but we don't have any way of proving that again.

But it's a materialist outlook on it, yes that's the point and then so ultimately it defers down to some kind of materialistic notion because it doesn't have another framework or more extensive framework to fit it in. And you know so who are these watchers, what are they, where are they coming from and I'm not going to pretend to know.

I think that you know when creation as we understand it, when the universe exists, whether it came into being or whether it is always existed as the Buddhists might say, you have a variety of intelligences that arise through the experiences and this intelligent forces, they have experiences which shape them just as we have experiences that shape us and they have various knowledge and powers that come from that just as we develop knowledge and powers from our experiences and they are vast at times.

And we may have encounters with them and we call them angels or gods and some of them may be very friendly to us as history seems to suggest and some of them aren't and some are just indifferent just as people are, so much truthful and somewhat deceitful. Yeah, I think the notion of deception is important because when we look at engagement with the paranormal and this is where many of these organizations, even the traditional ones, tend to lie.

And the lie might be a strong word, maybe they ignore for a while in order to get people doing something or at least in the door, is that active engagement with the paranormal is inherently destabilizing. It has to be otherwise there's no change. So whether it's transformation and spiderix or alchemy or whether it's through ritual magic and meditation, something must be destabilized in order for something to come to change, to have a new result, to have a new effect.

And this active engagement in the paranormal which George Hansen described in depth in his book The Tricks during the Paranormal in which I talk about in Pathology of the Sublime is almost universally ignored both by traditional groups, by paranormal researchers and by various other organizations. We have to tell people this is dangerous to some degree or at least destabilizing and what's going to happen in that destabilization is how you respond to that is going to decide your next level of awakening or your direction of your awakening or trauma in some cases, trauma and crisis.

But then how you go through that, that's why groups are so important but also good teachers because when you get destabilized you need someone to help you and someone who's been there before you, yeah, at least to help you through that process and engagement and the invisible to link it to your question, the invisible has different rules than ours, it has a different level of ethics than ours.

So when you for a perfect example, I wrote an article called Why Angels Can Be Douchebags and it was the first time I was a little vulgar, normally I don't do that and it's not a terrible word but it got a lot of attention and a lot of people read it and it was for a purpose. They have a different agenda than you do and you know what the thing about them is, at least most of the time, not always, is that you do a ritual, you do it for some purpose.

It doesn't necessarily work the way you wanted to, you didn't get, you didn't win the lottery, you know, you didn't get the specific new girlfriend you wanted, her job but the good news is things didn't get worse. Okay, that's the important one, things didn't get worse. Now the reason being is there are certain forces that work harmoniously and I think Elvis Levy pointed this out nicely that you know the things that work harmoniously we tend to not notice and we ignore them because they work harmoniously, where things are harm we don't see it, they don't rock the boat.

It's true, they don't rock the ball right. So these entities or beings treat us like children as well they should and they have our best interests at heart more or less, you know, depending on what it is. So with your best interest at heart, they know that's really not a good idea to let you eat six pounds of chocolate a day, you know, so maybe they can have a sense of what will happen here.

Now if you look at the involvement in spiritualist circles where there's constant communication with the dead or things like that, these entities don't have your best interests at heart, it's quite clear in the description of them. People who are involved in mediumistic circles tend to have a host of bizarre physical ailments that take place and in the engagements with them, the entities are quite clear, they don't care about the physical well-being of the mediums they deal with.

Even within Tibetan Buddhism, the lifespan of this state oracle is about 20 to 40 years, it's going to burn them out. Now so one is looking out for you, one simply doesn't care. Now I like to say with Satan or demonology, people want to invoke Goethe entities to do their bidding for them. I kind of used to use this reference, the gods, excuse me, the angels treat you as a child, they look out for your best interest but the demons treat you as an adult.

So, they ask for your assistance. They say, "Ask three times of the devil." Well, the point is: "Do you want this?" "Yes." "Are you sure you want this?" "Yeah." "Careful what you ask for. You're really sure you want this?" "Okay, good, you get it."

Well, the fact is, now you're responsible. Don't blame anyone else when things don't go the way you expected. That's because you're treated like an adult.

Hang on, I just have to inject a small little factory using factory. In old Islamic marriages, I don't know if they practice it anymore, but in the old days, they asked both the bride and the groom, "Do you want to take this man as your husband?" for example, and they asked that three times: "Yes." "Do you want to take this?" "Yes." "Do you want to?"

That's interesting because it's the principle of threes related to creation. If you're going to create something new, you have to follow the law of three. Yes, that's just a little interesting observation. When you say that demons do that, I guess it's related to free will. They cannot impose upon you something negative, like the old myth about the vampire needing an invitation. They repeat it three times to trick you into opening for that impulse to manifest.

Just a passing thought. I don't know if that made sense, but go on.

Well, yes. In the old church, and still in orthodox churches, before you enter the church, you renounce Satan and all his ways three times. This is important because, again, if you want to be treated like an adult in the universe, you must know the rules of being an adult. That means full responsibility for yourself and your actions, requiring a certain level of discrimination. Discrimination means understanding cause and effect: if this, then that.

When we talk about egregores, in many ways that's done for us because they're a limiting factor. If I want to be an electrical engineer, I can only take so many courses in English literature and still graduate on time. Limits can be good. If I want to be successful in life, there are certain things I must do. If I want to be healthy and fit, there are certain things I must do.

Limitations are the nature of existence. Without limitations, there'd be no such thing as duality, and we wouldn't be having this conversation. That needs to be understood. The question is, do we understand them, agree with them, and are they beneficial to us?

That's when we get into this collective thing. Is this really helping me? It might have helped me at one time, maybe not anymore. Entities in different planes of existence have different rules. We need to understand those rules before engaging them on their terms.

But are you saying all invisible creatures are egregores? No, not in the least, but all egregores are made up of both visible and invisible creatures and can be hijacked by invisible creatures. Most definitely, they can be hijacked. More importantly, they can be hijacked by humans who know what they're doing. I think they are more often hijacked by humans who know what they're doing, and those humans may be hijacked by some invisible force first through obsession.

I'm not certain that invisible entities can always impact the physical world as easily as they would like. We need to think about this because there will always be examples of it happening and examples of why it didn't happen. We need to take a wide view of paranormal phenomena to understand how these things happen and how they don't, to understand the kind of entities we're dealing with.

And UFOs, going back to that, it's just a spectacular mess. Especially if we also have this technology, wherever it came from.

But I think you touched upon something crucial, and I want to take it further. We've already established that egregores can be created deliberately by people who know what they're doing. They are also created automatically because if we are sleeping gods, we are producing egregores all the time without knowing it.

Like you said, even a family, a sports team supporter, the Catholic church, or big concepts like modern Jesus (not the historical Jesus, if he even existed) or the concept of Satan. Here's the crucial question: if we've been producing egregores like crazy since the first humans, some egregores without getting fed can probably fade away. For example, the Norse gods Thor and Odinnobody's giving them energy anymore, so they're lingering on, almost not in our existence.

Shouldn't that mean we are haunted by these egregores? Shouldn't we actually destroy some egregores that are negative to us? Could there be a war between egregores, unseen by us but maybe manifested through us in politics and such?

I'm reminded of Robert Anton Wilson, who wrote in "Cosmic Trigger" about meeting Jacques Valle and some leader who said, "I think there's a war in heaven." He could be referring to warring egregores.

That's very much the case. In Paul Sdir's book "Initiation" (translated by both Sadhu and Gareth Knight), he talks about the war of the egregores and how they fight. These things fight; their battle starts before the one on earth does. These forces at play are very complex.

Can they be destroyed? I question that. If they can be created, they should be destroyed too. What I'm thinking is, we can destroy the physical contact on earth (discussed in the book), but that energy exists for a long time in the astral and then goes dormant. The carcass of it is like a deflated balloon that can be re-inflated or absorbed.

Right, and I think this is going back to, like, we can look at the different groups joining a bigger aggregator. Tibetan Buddhism was very Tibetanmore Tibetan than Buddhist. 

What it did is it absorbed various cultural forces, some Indian and some Chinese, even though it doesn't want to admit to it. Others, you know, pan-Asian in terms of shamanism. 

We look at Catholicism, Roman Catholicism, and how it absorbs so many forces. We look at national socialism, German national socialism. It was an amalgamation in the early 20s of different groups until it took its formthe form that we think of it as. It didn't exist that way early on; it was different groups.

Communismthere were different communist groups at work until we finally get the ones we exist with today. 

Okay, so there's a constant amalgamation of groups and subgroups. We see that in esoteric circles all the time and in culture. Yeah, and in culture. 

I mean, the FUDOSI was a perfect example of that. There's just a variety of different organizations there. 

So this notion of "can they be destroyed?" I think what we can safely say is we can unplug them. Let's just be clear: we can unplug them and we can keep them from having a direct influence. 

But since energy can neither be created nor destroyed, that energy has to go somewhere. If it's not redirected, transmuted, transformed, or sublimated to some degree, then it will be absorbed by some other available vehicle.

Superb point. If you break down a form to its purest energy, youre dealing with mere creational energy. It can become something entirely new or be fused with something else. Nothing in this universe is really destroyed the way we think of it.

There may not be immortality, but there is eternity, even for ourselves.

Let me ask a more practical question. How can we benefit from an egregore?

We have to know what we're getting into or be able to ask the questions. Look at what we expect from this relationship and if it can provide that. It's like with an employer, a religion, or an esoteric group: ask questions so you know what you're getting into.

Also, know why you're going there. This is the problem when people come to volunteer at the institute. They're often taken back because I ask them, "Well, I really appreciate your efforts, and you want to help us, but what is it that you expect out of this?" They're shocked. They say, "Well, why do you want to volunteer? What is it that you want?" They'll often say something like, "Well, I just want to serve." 

I say, "Well, that's easy enough, but it's also ambiguous. How are you going to know when you've done that? Because I need to know. I need to know how you're going to know when you've achieved your level of commitment."

"I want to serve." Okay, so you translate an article for us. That's great, thank you. But if you don't know that going in and you just translate one or two and now you feel happy and want to go off to something else, well, maybe I had a different idea.

So we need to talk about this. What is your level of commitment? What can we expect from one another? That doesn't often happen in religious groups because people are so wide-eyed and bushy-tailed and just naive. They don't even know what they want. 

"I want happiness. I want to find peace. I want enlightenment." These are all terms we don't know what they are. What would that be? What will that be like? What is an example of that?

Spiritual teachers should say what is expected of you as a student and what you can expect from them as a mentor. Honest communication is needed. The enthusiasm and emotional aspect often override these decisions.

And the mystery, you know, mystery mongering and enthusiasm can just override those parts, and that gets in the way of practice. Enthusiasm is good, but it's not practice. 

Initiations are nice; collecting empowerments, collecting lineages, these are not practice. So when you're involved with a group, you have to say, "Well, how much of this is going to be my practice time, and how much of it is going to be me doing stuff for the group?" I mean, that can be what we call a karma yoga, to borrow that phrase. 

There can be a karma yoga aspect to things, and that's very important; it really is. However, unless you have decided consciously that that is your path and method, that's an area where some abuse can take place if we're not careful.

Most people who belong to something bigger are just minions feeding the egregore. For example, the Catholic egregore might be used by the Pope to go to war.

For example, it's related to the chapter called "Freeing Oneself from the Influence of Agriculture." That's like the other part I watcha cult victim. When that victim has freed itself from the cult, they think, "Oh my God, how could I? I didn't see." It's like a bomb; now they're free from that influence and see things differently.

You don't have to go as far as cults. Look at anything in culture. For example, a classical thing: "Oh, I was a white supremacist. Now I'm converted. I don't know what I was doing." You have it in all sorts of notions. Let's say you believe very much in some conspiracy theories, like the Annunaki. You think, "Oh, they are alive today, and this guy is a lizard man." Then you get out of that and think, "Oh my God, how could I be so stupid?"

Could this be people who have freed themselves from egregores and now have a more neutral view on the past?

Of course, this is seen across the board. Any type of manipulation involves your goodwill and naivete. Even in the most criminal aspects, like the recruitment process for a suicide bomber. Fundamentalist Islam is a powerful and destructive egregore, used politically.

It's used right by completely other things than what those who adhere to it believe. The ability and willingness of those who believe to resist it is limited because they're afraid of it. It's very decentralized, so the notion of aggregators also has that decentralized potentiality.

That's why I was saying the difficulty in using the word "destroy." We can unplug it rather than destroy it. We see that they go after a type of person, often of low intelligence, often marginally [ __ ], because you have to get someone willing to kill themselves. The profile of a good suicide bomber is well known. Emphasis on the word profile.

Now, let's skip to other cults. When you're recruiting for your cult on the streets of San Francisco, Los Angeles, or New York, there is a type of person you're looking for, not only in terms of age but also background. Personally, I think overly idealistic is in the same advantage but also without purpose. Homeless runaways are great.

So, your profileyou know we don't like to talk about profiles today, but profiles exist because they're real. It's a type of archetype, whether you're dealing with a Piscean, Scorpio, or Capricorn, or whether you're dealing with something from the Enneagram or from Azan Jolie's work on personality types. Personality types exist.

Myers-Briggs is used a lot by intel agencies. All of this exists for a reason because they give us a narrowness of factors that we can zero in on and begin to work with.

Recognize strengths and weaknesses as a human being and how those weaknesses may be used against you. A weakness is usually a strength used so much it becomes a habit. Compassion is good, but can become detrimental if overused.

A cult is a co-dependent relationship, where your identity becomes so wrapped up in the otherness that you have no sense of identity yourself. It's about identity manipulation. Political correctness is vile because its fundamentally identity politics.

Let's take a pause for a moment.

Okay, let's take a break and hook up in five minutes.

All of our files are free and will remain free. If you like the show, you can show support by donating one dollar to help with expenses. Just use the PayPal link on our website, YouTube channel, or Facebook page. Thanks.