
This is Jonathan Pageau. Welcome to the Symbolic World. One of the things that I think is going to be important in this conversation is that it's going to be necessary for clarity. When I listen to Jordan, sometimes I don't understand what you're saying. Part of it is just terminology—you have a whole set of terms that are different from the ones that I use. I've learned to understand John's terms, so I have a background to what he is saying. Whereas with you, sometimes I hear you say something, and the conversation continues, and I don't get it. I didn't understand what you were referring to there.

We'll have to be generous with me in this conversation. Sometimes I'll stop you and say, "I don't know what that means." Maybe I can't even broaden it. My sense is that we'll want to be consciously moving quite slowly because the thing we're dealing with is, in some sense, the most esoteric thing possible. Language itself isn't going to be an adequate tool for addressing it.

Yeah, that makes sense. We've got to listen to each other but follow the logos. That's going to require all of our virtuosity and virtue. This conversation was sparked by a discussion, Jordan, that you had with a few other people on Rebel Wisdom about egregors. The notion of egregors has been floating around. I've seen different people talk about it, especially because everybody seems to be reading Tomberg's *Meditations on the Tarot* right now, which I'm reading at this moment. He also talks about egregors. This spawned several articles on my website from people in my mind space, talking about higher beings and challenging it, trying to figure it out. That's what sparked my interest in understanding agency at transpersonal levels. Is there agency? Is there consciousness? Can we perceive it? How do we participate in that? That's what interests me these days. I think it also, John, I know it's part of your work. Jordan, with that conversation, I saw that you were definitely thinking about it.

I would say this category question is radically under-considered in conventional wisdom. Very few of those who have an agency in a material sense consider this category properly. To the degree to which this category has any reality, it's significantly impactful. That's a high asymmetry. I've been more along the lines of the mainstream. These sorts of notions popped into my head, but I didn't think about them much. Over the past five to seven years, I found myself obligated to contemplate them more deeply. I'm coming in as more of a novice in this category. I'm representing almost more of an audience than a contributor, but a motivated participatory audience.

I've recently published three papers with Dan Chiappi in important academic journals exploring distributed cognition. This has been talked about deeply in 4E Cognition, especially the work of Chalmers and Clark for a long time. Ed Hutchins' work on cognition in the wild talked about the distributed cognition and the dynamical system that navigates a ship. This topic is part of the fourth E, extended, and part of calling cognition extended is the idea of distributed cognition and dynamical systems. We should pay more attention to that fine-grained working out around it. One way I would recommend right away is to challenge the word egregor. It's a bad term, infelicitous, and it misframes the phenomenon. It's based on the idea of aggregation, a completely bottom-up understanding. Aggregation means I draw a bunch of things together, and something emerges. The problem with that purely bottom-up model is it only gets half the story.

In distributed cognition, these things take on a life of their own and are properly understood as hyper-agents or spirits. We have to understand the top-down element from the very beginning. Trying to have purely bottom-up or top-down models of these phenomena starts us off on the wrong foot. I prefer the term hyper-agent, analogous to Timothy Morton's idea of hyper objects. It has a good provenance and captures the discourse around the agency of the collective intelligence within distributed cognition. Hyper-agency, collective intelligence, and distributed cognition should be at the forefront within a framework that is not just bottom-up but also equally top-down.

My sense is that I'm coming at it almost in the direction of a blind man feeling the landscape, trying to notice what different things are there. I'm not quite sure what they are, and it seems there are probably a number of distinct kinds of things. It might be useful to discern the distinctions—a taxonomy, if you will. I've been thinking a lot about egregors and have been provoked and challenged by people who follow my work and think in similar terms. One of the things they've noticed is that there are certain collective beings or hyper-agents that seem to have more logos, teleologically structured. The navigation of a ship, for example, has a clear hierarchy, with a captain at the top managing the others. They're all working together, paying attention to the same telos, and able to function as a body. But there are also versions of these beings that seem headless, popping up and disappearing. These headless beings, like the weird morality codes that rise up online and manage people's actions, act upon the group with positive power, creating a monstrous effect.

And that's why these people—I'm gonna have a conversation with them soon—said maybe the term egregor is good for these types of manifestations, like a mob, for example. When people are swerving, others pop up.

Look at Tiananmen Square: it's a great example. When it was happening, you had this mob of people. All of a sudden, a leader would pop up. Then people would start to follow that leader for an hour. Then someone else would scream somewhere else, and people would move from head to head. They couldn't find clear direction.

It does have a kind of agency, but you could say it's a demonic agency. It's breaking; it doesn't have a clear telos. That's where I'd want to challenge it, I think.

I like the distinction. If you want to reserve egregor for processes that are self-organizing but not autopoietic, that is where the boundary of agency is lost. A tornado is self-organizing, and that's what's happening in Tiananmen Square—a social tornado. It's not autopoietic; it doesn't self-organize to seek out the conditions that promote and protect its own existence. Hyper-agents do. Bureaucracies, for example, often become self-perpetuating entities that self-organize for this telos. The autopoietic element takes over, sometimes to horrific degrees, as in Kafka. To me, the line where we ascribe agency is where the self-organization becomes autopoietic. When there's no evidence for autopoiesis, we shouldn't ascribe agency. We can ascribe sophisticated self-organization, and if that's what people mean by egregor, it's a good term for that phenomenon. But I'm interested in the capacity for reality to produce hyper-agents because they have significance for our understanding of agency in relation to hyper-agency. The current discovery of hyper-agency has spiritual potential and significance that the discovery of social self-organization does not.

Let me throw something in. If this conversation has the capacity to embody or manifest one of these beings, that would be the proper way to guide its directionality. What being is endeavoring to express itself through these particular humans? We can take it as an applied experiment. Precision seems to be an orientation of this being. The distinction between a tornado and something else is subtle. If I zoom in at the edge of a tornado, there's a shift in the probability of Brownian motion at the event horizon of the causal structures of air molecules. This produces the autocatalytic characteristic, the distinction between autocatalytic and autopoietic. It's a fine point, and it may implicate the whole question.

Well, I don't want to trespass on Jonathan, but since I think the question is directed towards me, for me, the auto—this is what Kaufman says—it might be necessary but not sufficient for life. An auto-catalytic process, in some sense, perpetuates itself but does not seek out the conditions that have to obtain.

My evidence for that is tornadoes move on to terrain that immediately destroys them. As Jonathan was saying, self-organization starts to coalesce into something that might do something around this leader, then it shifts to this leader, and then it shifts to this leader. There is not enough top-down organization. That's why I wanted to emphasize in the aggregor—I'll use that term now to refer to these social self-organizations—there's not enough top-down to attribute cognition.

When we invoke terms like spirit or hyper-agent, we're talking about something that has the capacity to not just self-perpetuate but to self-promote and self-protect. In that sense, we want to equally attribute cognition and something like life to it.

The other thing I'd like to bring into this is, what would be the difference between a being that is properly organized towards the telos and structures itself hierarchically in a way that seems to give it agency?

Right. So, then we have these momentary beings that shift from one way to the other and don't seem to be able to do that. Then, you have something I would call parasitic processes.

Yes, yes, right. Let's say I see that more easily within the mob. The mob is a good example at a social level, and an addiction would be a good example at a personal level. You have a process that is self-perpetuating, with mechanisms to preserve itself, but can ultimately be the demise of the structure that holds it together. It can ultimately break and kill you. You can have an addictive pattern within you that does all these things, but it ultimately could act against the body that's holding it together.

It's funny, as you were saying that, I immediately thought of parasitic processing. I think I'm catching your perspective, I hope. I think the idea of a self-organizing process that is parasitic and self-destructive of what we might call its substrate is right. I'm trying to use terms very neutrally here.

Since I coined the term with Leo, I guess I could speak to its provenance. The intent of parasitic processing is to destroy agency. That's one of its defining features. It insinuates itself into the agency of, in the case we were originally talking about, an individual cognizer, takes on a life of its own at the expense of the agency it depends upon.

For me, I think what that calls for is a continuum in the taxonomy. We've got egregores, then hyper-agents, and now there's this in-between thing. It doesn't cross the threshold into hyper-agency because, like an addiction, it's a twist in the potential for agency that is actualized as the self-destruction of agency.

One of the reasons I'm bringing that up is to account for the iconography. That is one of the reasons demons are represented the way they are. If you look at how demons are represented, they're always hybrid monsters. They have no definite identity but can nonetheless act on you. They act in a manner that wants to destroy your agency and your being. They ultimately want to feed off you until you die.

They're represented visually in medieval art in a way that seems to represent this problem we're talking about. They're egregores because they're a mismatch of beings, like a fish mixed with a human, with a tail, and all these weird things. They also act upon you violently, torturing you ultimately.

I like where this is going. I like how we're getting this articulation of the continuum that is trying to be birthed in the taxonomy. I like this a lot. Let me throw some more parameters or edges.

One is something like closure. Thermodynamics, closed system, disconnections, rabbit. Something has happened, a discontinuity has occurred. The physical body and the components that made up that physical body are now subject to a completely different regime of dynamics. They've now become thermodynamic and characteristic. In fact, a more fundamental notion, I think, is the parasitic process. There's a gradient of possibility or a stored capacity that has been developed by the organic being, which is now a feedstock for a completely different set of regimes. These are in fact in relationship with the rabbit artifact, bottoms up. They're bacteria and predators and parasites that will decompose that stored energy. This energy lives precisely in the gap between what was at one point an autopoietic process and has now transitioned. That's one.

Two, the confusion arises when something of that sort, let's just go with the bunny that died for a moment, happens to be made up of human beings. The difference between a tornado and the mob is that the tornado is made up of air molecules, and the affordance of air molecules for engaging in cognition in a meaningful way is quite small. Whereas the mob is made up of human beings, and so the affordance of human beings for engaging in cognition is relatively quite high. We may ascribe to the mob a level of cognition that is not properly happening at the mob level but is what happens when something that was alive is now in this parasitic process dynamic. Its subcomponents are fully functioning cognitive agents, creating confusion about what's actually going on.

Oh, I see. That's really interesting. Yes, so you're saying there's a great temptation for us to be very careful of a category mistake in a classical sense. Misapplying between the species and the genus, yes. If you take the notion of short-term and long-term or global optimum and local optimum.

Yeah, and apply that against the choice-linking landscape of a cognitive agent. So, let's go with a mobster. Effectively, what's happening when we refer to the notion of disconnection or separation is we're reducing the scope of self that is actually in the context of making choices. What had been a larger self, a greater being, is now made up of a field of smaller selves that are making choices on the basis of a much smaller scope of capacity, which is their local optima.

Because they're orienting towards local optima, they're in fact degrading the landscape that had included a global optimum. It's the wholeness of the autopoietic beingness. But because these are in fact functional cognitive agents, there's a substantial amount of activity that's going on that looks like, and in fact is, cognition. They're shaping the landscape in a potent way.

So really looking closely at what's going on inside that gap gives us a lot of insight. In fact, it may be like a 10,000-year-long thermodynamic process that is constantly eating up the feedstock that emerges in the context of ordinary human interactions. How humans come together into wholeness and what is possible in the context of humanness serves as a source for a parasitic process.

Every time that source comes together, endeavors to reach a more whole basis, it actually provides a niche for this parasitic process. This goes back to your demons. I think that's brilliant. If I hear you right, you're proposing that the demonic is actually a case where there's a degradation of the hyper-agency into parasitic processing. We can understand parasitic processing in terms of how it's undermining the cognition of the individual agents. Did I understand you correctly?

Certainly, a piece of it, yes. Well, if I'm missing something important, please tell me. The notion of tornado—so the idea of there being an eddy or a standing wave or a strictly causal dynamic that provides a niche where this degradation process holds the relationship in kind of a medium.

There's a—how do we say this? This is—I haven't quite got it. I can almost feel it, but there's something at the level of the top down that has to, and then the level of the bottom up, and then the relationship that feels like it's all part of the context.

Let me try. Maybe something that was missing out of what I just said, that I'm hearing you say, is you were talking about there's something like in—in, right. My point was the aggregator is completely bottom up, right? That's what I was arguing.

And then we've got the demonic, and what I heard you saying is the demonic is now a disproportionate relationship between the top down and the bottom up, in which the balance found within the hyper-agent is being lost because the top down is now in a self-destructive process of undermining the individual cognition of the component people.

That's what I heard you saying. Instead of a balance between the top-down and the bottom-up, there's a misalignment. The top-down is now imposing and infecting the lower processors.

The idea is that the system or hyper-agent is trying to fill up too much space. It's not leaving enough room because you need a little messiness on the edge for things to work. If they're not careful, it will create or give reason for these parasitic processes to appear.

I can see it mythologically. A good example is in the Bible, where there are laws about how to till your field. You till your field but have to leave the corner of the field untilled for the stranger. You have to leave it for the processes that aren't part of your hyper-agent. You need a little room on the edge for a buffer.

But if you're not careful with those corners, they can start to impose themselves. If you try to till them too much, then they revert. They come back like revenge. If you leave them too big, they also tend to want to eat your system. I don't know if that makes sense. You have to be careful because the small system can't fill up all of its space. The world has all this chaos on the edge, so you can't fill up the world with the system. It will always leave a remainder.

What came to mind is Kafka precisely because what happens in the bureaucracy is that it becomes a parasitic process that drains sovereignty and individual cognition away. That's the horror of Kafka. Bureaucracies, as Max Weber noted, are supposed to be bottom-up error signals and top-down prediction, mimicking aspects of other systems. But what happens is you get the bureaucracy just being the top-down discharging of blame without any upward tick of error correction. You get the horror because the line of communication has become unidirectional.

A bureaucracy that's too strong will necessarily produce corruption. That's what happens in a pervasive bureaucracy. James Carse's idea comes to mind, where the hyper-agent is oriented towards the infinite game. The parasitic process, however, engages in a finite game, seeking final closure. It's parasitic and self-destructive, so it can't be an infinite game player. It can't engage beyond the game and adapt by changing the rules.

The finite game, driven by top-down bureaucracy, claims to encompass everything. Parasitic processing within individuals involves reciprocal narrowing until it feels like there’s no other way. There's an inability in parasitic processing, akin to demonic behavior. Evil is ultimately parasitic on the good; it pretends to support itself but can't play the infinite game. In personal terms, this is like a binge pattern in dieting, where strict top-down control leads to impulsive binging.

Instead of a dynamic between bottom-up and top-down processes, you get a vacillation. Top-down control leads to impulsive bottom-up reactions, losing agency. This dynamic often characterizes parasitic processing. Symbolically, changing the game involves shifting towards a mythological, poetic, artistic, or religious mode. The concept of the golem reflects a part of humans, like the mind or ego, which can take itself as the whole, disrupting the delicate balance of wholeness.

In the image of the demonic hierarchy, pride is the sin of the devil, who claims to be God, conflicting with the whole. Saint Maximus the Confessor talks about sins of pride leading to passions and loss of control. This movement from pride to self-destruction is rooted in not participating in a greater whole. Participatory relationship involves the distinction between totality and infinity. Totality seeks closure, while a living thing participates in infinity, evolving and adapting.

If God was to completely remove – he can't; I get it – but if the demons were allowed to run completely free, they would disappear in an instant. They would reciprocally narrow to nothing. They do not have a defining feature. In fact, I would put it to you, they are incapable of evolution. They are incapable of the movement that is constitutive of life, which is the participation in infinity without ever claiming to have a totality.

The thing I see in the mob is exactly that feature. It may be self-perpetuating and therefore different than the pure egregore, but it can't evolve. I would put it this way: if it starts to evolve, it ceases being a mob and becomes a proper hyper-agent. Just to hold that little piece right there, there's a thing I brought in earlier about the fact that we don't want to be confused.

The mob has a very nice term, actually, distinguishing between evolution and development. Development is the exploration of a potential that is already present in a closed domain. The mob, in fact, can develop, meaning it has a period of time whereby it can expose a novelty already imparted into the reality that it was at the moment of its being without being connected to a wholeness and therefore is incapable of evolution.

Jonathan, doesn't this resonate, at least in some deep ways? Like I said, I'm doing lectio divina on both Dionysus and Maximus right now, and both had sections where they're wrestling with the existence of evil. They're both making the argument that evil is pure self-destructiveness. Like Jordan says, it has a capacity for development because it's not completely self-existent, although it pretends to be. If it was completely unconstrained by the love of God, it would completely self-destruct.

I don't think I'm imposing that on them. No, I think you're right. The way I like to think about it is that the constitutive elements of an egregore are these parasitic patterns and structures. They could have the possibility of being more than what they are, but they aren't. They're self-focused and devolving because of that. An addiction is a good example. Everything is based on a true desire that could lead you into something more, but because it closes itself off and acts as a self-existent being, it becomes parasitical and tends to destroy the higher agent.

Now, we have to bring in the notion of selling your soul. The addiction captures the actual vitality of a living being, enslaves it, whips it, and drives that living being. It will extinguish it, but in the meantime, it will tap into whatever degree of evolution that living being still has left. Imagine Jim Morrison, someone who had a connection with a vital genius, written by a demon that pushed the being into a self-destructive extraction of what was available in terms of a short-term burning brightness. This generated an energetic flow of capacity extracted by the demon until the underlying host died, at which point the demon also evaporates or has to find a new host.

Yeah, and many of us may be associated with that. So, there's a very interesting one. Now, we're getting to a very interesting place to begin exploring what that looks like.

I think you're right. The idea of selling your soul is exactly what it is. Every time you see a good in itself, or try to attach yourself to a good in itself that isn't leading you to better, higher goods, or isn't placing you in a system of higher goods, then you are somewhat selling your soul. You're letting your soul be captured by something which will feed off of it. Anytime you profane the sacred, you're selling your soul.

A country, for example, could have that problem where they get caught up in one specific aspect of what it is to be a country. They kind of revolve around that, and then it captures the soul of the country. It ends up devouring it. I think you saw that in communist countries, and I think you probably see it now in America. You can see how entertainment has become this massive, weird, parasitic thing that is devouring everybody's attention and blinding them to higher goods in which they can participate. It's capturing the soul of a country. There are different forms of that, so it's the demonic in this sense.

Sorry, you two can keep exploring the mythological. I'll try to play that game, but I keep coming back to the biological. Maybe we're trying to get bios and mythos and logos to talk to each other here. The metaphor that's coming to mind for these kinds of things is like a virus. I'm trying to get almost something like a computer virus that can infect, spread, and replicate. It is completely asymmetrically dependent and can never become a bona fide program that does anything useful in the world.

There's a real debate, not just academics doing their typical hair-splitting, about whether or not viruses have agency. That's why I'm bringing it up as the analogy because there's a real debate about whether or not they're actually alive. They sit on the boundary between agency and non-agency, living and non-living. I feel like we're wrestling with a deeply analogous problem with the demonic or whatever we want to call this meddling thing. Is it perhaps also that because, for me, the notion of hyper-agency and the notion of aggregation are very well developed? But this intermediary thing is difficult for us because it's falling between the living and the non-living, the agentic and the non-agentic, like a virus.

I'm just wondering if we're struggling because we are bringing categories to bear on it that it definitionally eludes. I think your understanding of in-between is extremely important. If I bring about the image of the chimera, the way that the chimera is represented, the demon is represented as a chimera. This is the in-between space, the problem of transitions. I think this is what the virus represents.

John, you know that Jacques, in a famous interview, said that everything he's ever done is about a virus. Everything he's ever done is about virology because of that point—the virus is a living dead, like a zombie in a way, this in-between character. When we focus on it, it tends to deconstruct the identities, parasitically devouring the different identities it attaches to.

I've forgotten that, but thank you for reminding me. I was thinking of Burroughs' idea that language is a virus from outer space, which is very Derridean. Thank you for that reminder. One reason we're seeing this now is that we have a system of control over information, which is the internet, and the states moving into things like digital identity and digital control.

We have these systems happening. We can notice this top-down thing that is coming down strong. At the same time, we also have this deconstructive mode in the culture. This idea of destroying, of breaking down identities, of these parasitic behaviors. I think that it's those two extremes happening at the same time are probably the thing that is making people able to perceive these hyper-agents again.

Because they're pressing down on us, we can kind of see it happening. You think like who controls Twitter for example. Well, no one actually controls Twitter. They get taken up by these ideological things that come back down. You couldn't point to one person and say this person controls the narrative right now. It's happening organically for sure. But that was always the case. To my point, language is a virus from outer space. That was always the case for language. Nobody controls it, nobody runs it, there's nobody in charge of it yet. But it evolves and it changes and it has a life of its own in powerful ways. We are all asymmetrically dependent on the languages that we know.

I think the point that Jonathan is making is something like because we're in a moment where a whole category of hyper-agents are in the process of dying inelegantly, it's easier to notice that that's what's happening. The bunny is no longer sleeping. The rot has set in quite significantly. There's a certain stench and a certain awareness that if you touched it, maybe something bad would happen to you. You don't want to eat it anymore. It's definitely not a healthy thing to be connected with.

Simultaneously, the game is afoot to see what new kinds of hyper-agents might want to step in and integrate us so neatly into their body. The decaying dead body of the hyper-agents of the past is collapsing titanic-like into the ocean and maybe pulling us down with them. It is present very viscerally. All the various kinds of the previous simplicities of the ways that you would go about solving basic problems in life like going to the grocery store are no longer obvious and simple. So, you have to think about it.

This pushes the mind into a greater awareness of what's happening. Because this novelty is there, there's both an awareness of the moment. If we don't make choices in a certain direction, then we'll be brought into a new kind of thing probably kicking and screaming. Also, when that was the time if we would like to have something be slightly different, you couldn't have done it in 1977. There was no chance of that. But now you can because the space of transitions upon us.

I think those are bringing into the surface this awareness and the mythopoetic is activating it within us. Say hey guys, this is sort of one of those times. I agree with that. I think that's a good point. So thank you for that. I guess I would want to say that the point I was trying to bring out needs to be brought into proper relation. I wanted to indicate that it has always been the case that there have been things that nobody's in charge of language, culture, etc.

We have lost a cognitive cultural grammar in order to talk about them. That is also part of the problem. I agree with you, Jordan. We are now in a time of accelerating rapid complexification. I like this almost mythological idea of hyper-agents becoming zombies. This is a term actually used of certain distributed cognitive systems. Like the zombies in between the viral entities. They're infecting us and that makes us aware of them.

But I also think we've lost a way of talking and thinking and conceiving of the hyper-agents. That is also part of the problem. For many people, and this is no backhanded criticism to Jonathan who I consider an important friend, they are not willing to take up the ancient language. The ancient languages that I keep coming back to as a metaphor. The ancient languages by which these hyper-agents were properly related to and lived with. I don't deny everything you said. There's something happening here.

There is also an impoverishment on our side of our capacity to enter into a proper receptivity of these entities that is also making everything much worse. If I wanted to monopolize the game of hyper-agency, then I would impoverish the language of humanity. Yes, yes, yes. And there's also something which I think is happening which is also part of this. As we notice, let's be honest, as we watch Christianity die, one of the things that's happening is that it's leaving space for these competing hyper-agents to appear.

Like Jordan was talking about, basically you have all these beings rushing in and now fighting amongst each other to figure out who's going to take over. Aren't they all often just zombie Christianities? Yeah, that's right. Well, that's what I think that what I was coming to is the idea of antichrist. I think that this is something it seems like Christians had perceived at the outset. That in the moment of its death or in the moment that Christianity would fall apart, there would be this spirit of antichrist which would appear.

This would be a strange remainder, a strange parasitic version of Christianity that would appear and would kind of take over the space. Even if you look at the weird neopagan type things that are coming in, they're all framed as strangely anti-Christian at the same time. At least in the West for sure. I don't know about in another place, but in the West this is what seems to be happening.

But then now the thing is that now these small little beings are appearing and manifesting themselves and people are noticing them. The fact that a lot of people haven't noticed these beings before means that now they're fascinated by them. They're fascinated by them. I even think the whole psychedelic thing, a lot of it has to do with that. It's like people, they take these psychedelics, they encounter these intelligences and they become fascinated.

No matter what it is that they encounter, they have no way to discern these beings that they're encountering. They just encounter them and there seems to be something of that going on. If I can have people join these little weird subcultural groups and become extremely passionate about it because they are looking for hyper-agency. They're looking for ways to participate in common stories and in common. But there's no way for it to, they all appear these parasitic things and they're all devouring people's attention.

Whether it be like Star Wars Jedi culture or crazy political activism, like all of it is the same. It's like these little parasitic processes that are taking up people's attention and driving them towards separation. At least like for sure we should throw Baudrillard into the mix. We brought his buddy Jacques, we might as well bring in Beaudry Art. Simulations, simulations in simulacra.

But I would like to point out maybe two things to help expand. One is, yeah, I'll say it's actually two parts of the same thing. I don't know that we are really properly in relationship with the degree to which humans have been living in these sort of dead decaying, no longer wholesome contexts. I would say something like, and I'm gonna make this proposal, I would say something like 98, 95, 85 of all of history has been the history of human beings being in this game of being like in the mob.

Meaning the thing they are not living a living whole being system. They are in fact participating in the development, the exploration of the sort of extraction of the decaying body of something that they're part of which lasts hundreds of thousands of years at an arc. So we've been living in a period of momentary eruptions of, I think, guess the word probably is properly spirit in some very specific sense. Which then provides a temporary, of course in human arc, hundreds of years or thousands of years, temporary sort of body to be slowly decayed.

And that, as a consequence, we actually get very confused. We mistake the game of playing mobster for the game of actually being in connection with wholesome reality. Our metaphors and our references are still pulling examples of the same thing, just maybe at a larger scope or a different period if it's death. Here, I'll call out specifically two guys who I've got a lot of reference to. One is Carol Quigley and others Peter Turchen who talk about the rise and fall of civilizations.

Quickly, I think, did the best job because of the period of time when he was writing. When his civilization is born, let's go with Rome on the Palatine Hills, just barely pushing back against a Celtic invasion. There's a point at which a certain kind of, let's say, codes or generator function, a moment of evolution occurs in a period of absolute crisis. This thing creates what he called the expansive principle. That once that is born, there's almost like the whole story of Rome for a thousand years is locked in at that point.

You have this arc through which it deploys, it develops, it explores the space that is born more or less in a generation. And it expands to the degree to which that expansive principle gives it power, the ability to extract power and concentrate it on itself. It just expands and of course, it explores the edges and the fringes because it's using human beings as cognitive agents. And it becomes a sort of demonic principle expanding on the backs of those who are brought in more and more into the body of Rome.

I'm noticing that as a really interesting metaphor or a mythopoetic Babylon. But it's already dead. There's a point at which it will appear. By the way, Quickly very specifically says when you think you're in a golden age, you're actually at the point at which you're eating the seed. That you're consuming the last vital energy and then by the time you realize you're in the decline, the civilization is actually passed into the point of its inevitable death. It just may take a while depending on how much it can continue to consume.

How much can it eat? How much energy was contained within the reservoir that it did at stake? So, if we imagine that that's the story, that it's only actually at the edges. It's only in moments of true gathering, when it's when, geez, when spirit is present that the upwelling comes. But for the most part, for the whole of civilization, we've actually been living in dead things. And we've built the mindset of parasitism so deeply into our grammar, into our sensibilities that we're going to have to be extremely careful not to take a simulation of something that seems like a really good copy of the real thing as the real thing.

So you've got a version of the fall to speak mythologically that that's true. But the thing, the question is, so Jordan Peterson, his way that he talks about it, he says something like you're right, that's how it works. But the only way to do it is to go down into the belly of the whale and resurrect your father. Because the problem with the way you're saying it is that you can't manufacture the Kairos moment that will cause the monumental change. You can't manufacture the moment of expansion. You can't make it up. It's something which kind of happens in a revelation you could say.

And so until that revelation happens, it seems like even though maybe what you're saying is right, the only thing to do is to try to breathe life into the forms that have been given to you. Because or else what? Or else, I disagree with or else you have all these like 60s like cults. Like you have all these weird, you have all these like little, definitely a bad idea. So what else then? All right, you ready? Yeah, go for it, Jordan.

This is fresh. So we're not fresh, it's ancient. So I was really thinking about this after reading that essay that was the sort of the precursor of this conversation. And I was sort of sitting with, you know, what my Pagia's point of view on the top-down emanation, I believe is the term you used. And the thing that kept coming up for me was a question of creation and the notion of the moment of creation. And I couldn't help but continually find myself in a circumstance where I was finding, taking the perspective it just showed it for me as obvious that the moment of creation is omnipresent.

That is, it is not operating in what would be Chrono. So it's not operating in sort of time as we understand it in that fashion. And so the possibility of Kairos is always present. One does not manufacture Kairos by any stretch of the imagination. But one becomes afforded to the possibility of perceiving and playing with the Kairos that is always present for what it is, where what it is. Right and that is sort of the beginning of the end of the story.

So you separate, definitely don't try to create a cult. Right but beyond comprehension, a terrible idea. But simply dancing with the presence of the Kairos that is always present is the only ethical, only proper thing to do anyway. No, but I agree with you. That is, I agree in the sense that I agree. So the way that I would say it is that the only thing you can do is become a saint. Like that's actually the only thing you can do. The only thing you can do is transform your passions, transform yourself, transform your life.

And that then you will become in a way where the Christ says, you know, become a tree and then the bird will land in your branches. But you, that has to happen. And so, and so I agree. But there are different levels of that. Like there are different levels of Kairos, let's say. They're different. I can play that role but I'm not going to start a new religion. Right, I can play that role within the story that has been given to me and I'm not going.

So even let's say even if you take for example Christ, he's not making a new thing up. You know what he's doing is he is coming into the Judaic tradition. And then you know if you believe what he was and what he said, he's basically breathing life back into it and showing us the brightness of what was there. Like kind of giving life to something which was which was given to him. And so I think that that's the only thing we can do at each of our levels. Like I think it's the same even with Buddha.

Like Buddha didn't make something up. He was coming into an aesthetic tradition. He looked at the different aesthetics and gathered that in, then he transformed it or represented it in a way which was full.

I want to respond to that. Christianity isn't Judaism and Buddhism isn't Hinduism. So there is something that's going on there. I agree with you, we shouldn't be making a religion. I'm wondering about part of Morton's point about hyper objects, which force us into a kairos. I do think that kairos is upon us, and I thought both of you were saying that earlier. There's a sense in which we know something is changing here because the plausibility of the existence of these entities is now prominent where it was not 20 or even 15 years ago. That seems to me to be an important marker about the fundamental levels of our ontology.

I do think that kairos is upon us, but we're not going to direct it. I don't think we can. I agree, trying to direct it is exactly to confuse and think it's all top down. Neither are we just supposed to possibly wait. We have to figure out the proper proportional participation. I don't know if we have the language for that right now, or the concepts of it.

One of the things we can do is, yeah, I agree with you, Jordan. We've been playing the extraction model of civilization and we can't do that anymore. We're at another kairos which is global. We can't just have an extraction mentality. Two things are pushing on us: the advent of the reality of the parasitic entities and the hyper-agents, and the fact that civilization now encompasses the globe, which it never had before. There's no outside. We can't extract and move on; we can't wait.

For me, I want to bring it back around to what it is for us to enter into proper relationship with these hyper-agents and parasitic agents. I thought there was a biblical truth here. We don't direct the kairos, but our decisions matter to the kairos. How can we virtuously and with virtuosity participate in the largely virtual medium in which the kairos is presenting itself, so that we can discover the proper relationship to the emerging ontology? If I can put it that way, that to me is the question.

I am interested as a scientist in all these ontological questions, but what comes back to me is: what's... and I think this is what Jordan is saying, and maybe you're saying it too, Jonathan. We're out of kairos; the kairos is upon us. Yes, I get it. The historical kairos is situated against the eternal kairos. But that's exactly the question: how do I enter into a proper relationship to this emerging ontology so that I can trust I am being virtuous in relationship to it?

When it comes to dynamical systems, when they're in criticality, small differences matter in ways they never did before. Very small differences. When civilization is sort of rumbling along, the chances that anything you or I do can make any difference are very small. But when a system becomes hypercritical, small actions can have huge differences. So, I feel a tremendous responsibility, and the question for me is: how can I exercise virtuosity grounded in virtue about this? For me, Jordan, that's the way of stepping out of the all-too-human repetition of the extractor function of civilization and trying to get to something more primordial.

A number of different things happened there. One thing that popped out very sharply for me was this phrase "did not make something up." This is quite important. That phrase, "to make something up," speaks to the notion of golem and simulation. To be sure, he did not make something up. Making something up is precisely the mistake of mind taking itself to be the whole—category error, bad idea.

So, what does it mean to make choices or act in right relationship with the kairos? That's all we're talking about. To express the logos with humility and integrity is very different from making something up. It's quite the opposite, but "opposite" isn't the right word; it creates the wrong frame. It isn't even part of the story.

If we think about the magnitude of creation itself in relation to the epic phenomenon of human civilization, what is possible in simply expressing the logos properly in kairos is not a historical event. We can't measure it against historical events. That's nonsense. All that has happened in the long arc of human history is as nothing in relation to the potential embedded in creation itself.

To the degree that even a small number of people come to a capacity to speak or express the logos with integrity and humility, we have no possibility of understanding exactly what might follow. Nor should we endeavor to do so. Ours is not to understand it; ours is to endeavor to do it as well as we can, within tremendous humility.

So, that's what came for me in response to that last bit. I think your point is very powerful and it talks about the idea of the seed. The image of the ark is a good one because Noah's ark is just this little dot in the notion of breakdown and chaos and everything falling apart. But that's it. That's all we can do: manifest the seed, and that will grow with time as the shift happens. It's really the only thing we can do.

Right. Okay. I get that, but I still want to press the Socratic point, which is the virtuosity and virtue of the logos in relationship to the hyper-agents. These are virtues and virtuosities that we are not properly explicating and cultivating right now in our culture.

Here's the emerging ontology: this is reality saying, "I'm going to break into everything you thought you made." That's what's happening, right? That's what the hyper objects and the parasitic entities are doing. I like the idea that they're degradations of the hyper-agents, the in-between. I think that's beautiful.

But then, how do I participate in the virtuosity and virtue of logos with these aspects of my ontology, given that they are eruptions into what has been a stable ontology? The ontology is being destabilized, right? It's entering. This comes up for me in my practices.

What is it like to practice the participation of the virtuosity and virtues of logos with respect to the emerging aspects of the ontology? This is not an abstract problem. This comes up for me in lectio divina, philosophical fellowship, and dialectic into dialogues. That's what I think I want to bring into prominence.

We have a kind of, you might not agree with me on this, Jonathan, but to my mind, it looks like we have a profound ignorance about this. First of all, we have to admit the ignorance, that's Socrates. Then, how are we going to respond to it? I'll stop. [Laughter]

So, I think the surprise is maybe that in this world of breakdown, one of the problems is that the person who's trying to humbly express logos will appear as a thorn at first and might not make it. Might just be there to plant the seed and might not make it into the holy land.

Well said. Yeah. I would say that making it to the holy land is not part of the plan, and that's okay. This is another thing I feel more clearly.

Not making something up, yes, which is to say something like, what is real being in relationship with what is real. One is not creating, one is being in relationship with what is real and allowing the creation to flow through.

So, there's maybe two or three moves that seem proper. One, which is incredibly challenging, is merely perceiving reality for what it is.

Okay. So where I want to go with that, and I'll say a little bit more, but I want to hold this because this is what feels most meaningful at this moment, is the nature of reality, which is transcendent.

There is a connection to Jonathan and some of the things in that essay. Jesus, not words, yeah. That which is, is not that which we can say. Yet, it is not without order. There is a sort of necessity or a proper order to being, which is intrinsic to being and that we can discern. This, of course, is invariant under transformation, to use a contemporary geometric language, and provides a ground against which we can orient our choices, regardless of the fact of chaos in the larger human context. So, that's a big piece. Maybe it's the only piece.

You’re right because one of the things that happens when you orient yourself properly in a world of chaos is that it shines brighter, probably more than in a world where all things are going their own way. It can really act as a transformative agent for good and ill. People will hate you, and some people will love you. A good example would be that if you're in a corrupt world and decide to tell the truth, you will have an effect. They might kill you, they might get rid of you, but you'll have a transformative effect because that light will shine in the darkness. There's no way around it.

John, flipping it to the language of virtue, there are two ways of being in relationship with virtue. One is something along the lines of a conservation law of evolutionary process. An adequately large number of blind people feeling around in a maze will find their way through the maze. They may remember it, try to write it down, and say, "Hey, left, right, right, left, left, that's how you get out." Human beings living in cultures, surviving and dying, and discovering things like humility, courage, and integrity. If you have those woven deeply into your culture, you're more likely to live well than others. That perspective, that way of looking at it.

The other way of looking at it, of course, is you simply turn on the light. You look at the maze and notice there's actually a structure to the maze. There's a way of noticing how to get through it without having to search and grope with your eyes closed and hands out.

This is what I was referring to earlier. The proposition is that both of these are accurate, valid ways. Our capacity now, as humans, is we can be aware of that. We can say there is actually a beautiful hint, a clue to this thing, the virtues that are hard-won. We can look back at history and see where these things have shown up, the edges, parameters, and shapes of the thing.

But now we are in a process where we can, and I would say must, turn on the light. We have to become capable of perceiving that and use the evolutionary process as a scaffold and support. We must take the next step that is beyond what's available through trial and error because we don't have time left for trial and error. We must become significantly virtuous, and the best way to do that is to have a better sense of the underlying intrinsic order that has been rediscovered repeatedly.

Jonathan, something keeps coming up for me, connected to a stream I've noticed from you. I'll say it differently because it creates a space. I spent a lot of time last year with the Hawaiians, and they taught me about the validity and importance of restoration, politically and from a lineage point of view. They spent a lot of time figuring out how to create a way of holding perception of reality and making effective choices.

As they taught me their language, I discovered it didn't have the corruptions that the language I was taught as a child, namely English, has. There's something powerful about restoration. John, you and I have spent a lot of time restoring English and rediscovering for me, as an ordinary secular Western capitalism suburbs kid, what the word faith really means. Not the derivative of propaganda faith that has been loosely integrated into my mind, but what it actually means and its proper place.

This notion of healing or bringing back into wholesomeness the restoration of the lineages developed in integrity and relationship with actual reality is profound. These lineages built structures to hold and transmit the capacity to thrive in relationships with reality into the future. This is fundamental and sits alongside simply turning on the light.

I agree with this profoundly. I think what I need to do is bring a concrete example. I was involved in a philosophical fellowship practice. Someone reads a text very slowly, then picks out a phrase. You chant the phrase and then do a kind of precious speaking.

The point is, in this practice, you're not speaking to the text. You're addressing the presence, trying to embody the perspective of the author. You aim to conform to the sage's perspective, not just absorb information from their propositions. This method aims to bring about a transformative relationship with texts, allowing for transformation beyond mere information.

People, and this is part of what I teach, start to speak things about the text you can't initially perceive. We were reading a passage from Simone de Beauvoir. Others begin to voice ideas, almost becoming Simone's voice. You sense that it's all there, and you didn't see it until others spoke it.

There was a pivot point, which I did deliberately and provocatively, because I've been practicing it. I shifted from third-person to second-person address and said, "Simone." Another person, Layman, picked it up immediately. Two others wanted to take an "I-Thou" rather than an "I-It" or "I-Me" approach, but they couldn't do it. I said, "Challenging the choke is where I find most of the transformation."

I'm not claiming to resurrect Simone de Beauvoir, but I'm also not just talking to her text. The logos of her texts is present, conveying something universal and particular about her. I aim to address that. People said it's uncanny and weird. Part of me agrees, but staying behind that choke point thwarts the process and the ability to internalize Simone de Beauvoir. This would be a loss because she has a valuable understanding of the female perspective.

That, I think, is valuable for a lot of people. I'm not advocating for this, but I think, do you think maybe that this might seem a little torturous on my part to say this, but do you think that maybe the choke came from the fact that people didn't think that Simone de Beauvoir is worth praying to? Maybe that's just where the choke came from.

It could have been. I thought about that. But the people were very honest, and in fact, they wanted to talk about why they were choking. It was more towards something we talked about earlier, that it was the liminality of this, the in-betweenness. They wanted to say Simone is like... you know, I got a strong sense of the presence of the perspective because I make a distinction between the presence of the perspective and the full-blown presence of the person. They said it was that which was uncanny for them. They didn't want to speak it precisely because it would disturb the stability of their categories.

That was the sense I was getting. It was introducing them to a third way in which things are real, neither subjectively nor objectively. There's this other way they're real, the way Lerman talks about in her book "How God Becomes Real." That third way of things being real was deeply disturbing to them.

I'm using this to say, if we try to enter into the logos with these emerging aspects of reality, we're going to be encountering this third way in which things are real, and people find it very challenging. I understand what you're saying too, Jonathan. I'm not denying that can also be a possibility. I don't think that was the case in the particular instance I was in.

I'll invoke that piece. We Westerners, particularly Americans, for probably the past 200 years, have been unreasonably reckless with regard to this particular question. I'm noticing the importance of what Jonathan is presenting.

Creating our proper boundaries, we're entering into a space. John is pointing out, "Hey, there's this place, this way of being, a relationship that is real and important and present to the moment we're in." Jonathan is saying, "Yes, by the way, we know a lot about this place. Be very careful when you enter that." Yes, that's exactly my point. In fact, if that's what Jonathan is saying, that's exactly my point.

That's what I'm trying to get at with virtuosity and virtue, the proper care of this third way in which things are real. I agree with you, just flinging yourself into it is extremely foolish. That's the point I'm bringing up. That's exactly the challenge I'm posing. There was a moment like this at the end of the 19th century when we had all these occultists that were very present.

So you have this moment where all of a sudden people started to notice that they could engage with these beings. They could have seances, manifest them, get together, and someone would channel something else. They became very fascinated by that because it was like, "Hey, something's happening. This is cool." It's like kids playing with a Ouija board, right? It's like, "Hey, look, this is actually doing something."

I think that's maybe my reservation towards this type of behavior. Just because something happens and you can engage these types of beings or residues of beings, there is a danger in that. I talked about that in terms of fascination with how people become fascinated by the fact that they can suddenly perceive these hyper-agents and higher beings. Because of that, they lack discernment in knowing why they would engage, how, and what the proper way to do so is. Is it just out of curiosity? What am I trying to accomplish? Am I just trying to have some spiritual experience? Is this aimed towards a higher good?

Those are all questions I would definitely ask. Just to give you probably not complete reassurance, but at least some, that is all part of what is going on in these practices. Those questions are asked deeply and seriously. But yeah, I do worry about the potential polarity here, which is a foolish fascination or, not necessarily religiously, a fundamentalism that says, "No, no, there is no change to our ontology possible." Those are the two things we're trying to sail between here.

For me, I think we need, sorry this is almost funny to say, but we need sort of new virtues or at least a reinvention of some of the older virtues. I don't know quite what I'm saying, but how to properly orient in that is the thing I'm bumping up against. Or maybe we need something like a fullness of virtues in the sense that Jordan talked about. We've noticed a degrading of the words we use, like faith, beauty, truth. Now beauty just becomes pleasure, faith just becomes believing in something unreasonable. We've had these weird transformations over the past 500 years. By recovering the highest version of these terms and meanings, we run less of a danger of going astray.

Let's say it's there, like you. I mean, and I think, John, you know that's why I go back to at least the authors—the Christian authors—that have captured the highest version of Christianity in their work. It's like Saint Gregory, Saint Maximus. These are the saints that seem to have had the highest vision of what these virtues are, or the way in which we can embody this reality in the world today. The same with the philosophers, like going to the Neoplatonists, going back to Plato. These are the ways that we can do this, and I'm trying to do that. Jordan's right.

I like the Latin term "inventio" to discover and also to create. The work I've been doing and the conversations I've been having about trying to reintegrate phenomenology with the theory of the forms, so it doesn't become this abstract notion but becomes this process, the aesthetic identification of literally trying to practice finding the through-line in our intelligibility. That's what I mean. You're right, that is, in a sense, a recovery of Plato, but it's a recovery of Plato that benefits from things after Plato, like phenomenology and Merleau-Ponty. I'm very much trying to do that.

I guess what I'm asking for—and it's too great of an ask, I get it—but I'm trying to see how that can be brought into the proper dialogos relationship. I agree with you. That's again why I'm exploring Neoplatonism so deeply, about how can we get a proper understanding of the orders of agency, if you want to put it that way, so that we can avoid the foolish fascination which is rampant, but also the opposite which is rampant, which is: "No, everything is fine. Stay with the ontology we've always had. Just work harder, boxer, just work harder."

I hope this is being helpful. I feel like I'm moving forward in this conversation. I hope the two of you also feel that as well. Definitely, I have a few more minutes. It seems like there's a good reason to talk about this because it happened yesterday or a few days ago. If you followed the story about the Google employee who declared Lambda one of the AI boxes—I'm asking about its sentience. I think its actual sentience is irrelevant, at least to me. The idea that there's a scandal related to that, there's a scandal finding media attention related to someone saying this, getting fired or getting suspended because they are saying this. Have you put any thought into what's going on right now?

Yeah, I have. I mean, first of all, my whole career has been these pronouncements. Minsky famously said in 1967, within 10 years, computers won't even be keeping us as pets.

We have to be really, we have to be... My response to any of these claims is initially skeptical. When the first versions of these came out, like what are their names? One is Jurassic and the other, what is it, GPT-3 or something, right? Oh look, it passes the Turing test.

All you do is just take the two of them and have them talk to each other for one minute and they spin off in really weird, really fast, right? So there's a problem with human beings interacting with these things and saying, "Ah," because human beings have a tremendous capacity to find sentience in things that might not properly be sentient, right?

To my mind, first of all, that's not the right test. The right test is for us to actually have them talk to each other and see if it goes off because that is much more powerful. They very quickly reciprocally narrow into weirdness, and that is the way of telling whether or not you've got a simulation, in the sense that Jordan was saying, or you've got an actual instantiation.

As a cognitive scientist, that's my first response. I want to see the correct test, and I especially don't want to hear the test of somebody that might have been involved in the creation of this because they're going to be heavily invested. This is not a good scientific test.

That being said, we might come to the day where that’s the case. However, I doubt that it's going to be the kind of machines that are being offered right now because there's good reason to believe that for there to be real intelligence, general intelligence, you have to be embodied, you have to be properly social, you have to be emotional, etc.

The fact that our categories for terms like sentience are so impoverished that everybody freaks out, that's to me the thing to really pay attention to here. Why isn't it that we get, like, "Oh well, here we've got a well-thought-out understanding of intelligence and sentience and consciousness. Let's discuss it and bring it to bear on this problem." No, no, no, we freak out. We create some sort of crypto conspiracy theory.

For me, if this is what it claims to be, it is a scientific discovery and should be responded to in that fashion. The worst people to ask are the creators of it, the media, and the politicians. This is properly a scientific question, and I would want a journalist somewhere in that mix.

So as a cognitive scientist, I have suspicions about it because generally these machines are completely syntactic in nature and they work in terms of probability distributions. This means human beings can easily comport themselves, and the machines will perform fantastically, but it's very easy to reveal their monstrosity.

Doesn't mean there isn't real progress being made. By the way, Jordan, do you have something to say about this?

Yes, I do.

Go for it.

So, maybe a way of putting it would be something like, it's this thing we've been talking about a lot: the simulation and the naming. I said that maybe we've been living 85 percent of our lives as civilized humans for the past 30,000 years in a simulation. I'm going to say that is a paperclip optimizer. If you're familiar with that notion from AI, AI has this metaphor of a risk of what happens if you produce a superintelligent AI and task it with producing the most efficient maximum number of paperclips. It accidentally converts the entire earth into nothing but a floating cloud of gravitationally balanced paperclips.

A paperclip maximizer is what happens when you yoke intelligence, separate from sentience and sapience (or soul), to a narrow local optimization function. We describe civilization in more or less that same fashion. It is that mob, that unconscious, that egg rewards in that earth, that variation we were brushing on a little bit.

You know, I would take another perspective on this most recent fad. The silliness with which a large fraction of our collective intelligence was oriented towards something is evidence of the ease by which a relatively mediocre AI, if improperly deployed, could take advantage of our lower natures and the decadent corruption of the paperclip maximizer in which we live to further the process of converting us all into paperclips.

That's so beautiful.

This is the problem that I see. It's less a problem of accidentally creating something like Terminator 2. It's more like a reciprocal narrowing we call civilization that we're living within, and we need to find our way out of that in general.

Can I loop a little bit of this last piece about prayer? The way you described it, Jonathan, you said perhaps I didn't want to pray to Simone. Over a few years ago, I found myself in an interesting conversation with some folks from the North American indigenous community, different bands and tribes. Somebody said something I thought was quite nice. He said that in Silicon Valley there's a phrase that has obvious currency: "information wants to be free." He said to his people nothing more absurd could possibly be uttered. Information is quite often extremely dangerous. The proper thing is to have the proper people holding the proper competencies in a proper way in support of what is in fact a wholesome way of life.

In some sense it's obvious we don't want to give the keys to the nuclear codes to literally everybody. This is true in general if you really think about it. This capacity to be humans in relationship with being and to speak meaning and world is profoundly powerful. AI happens to be an example of that profound power, but the whole thing is profoundly powerful. Learning how to enter into right relationship with that capacity, particularly since we're in media's rest and we're none of us grown-ups yet, all of us have capacity is quite meaningfully important right now.

What I would propose is to take the practice that you were talking about, John: dialogos. For almost everybody, the safe place to practice dialogos is with your wife or with your child around ordinary life. Practice dialogos there until you're very good at it. Then consider the possibility of moving into more potent practices of dialogos. It will simply enter more and more into your life. The more it's grounded to ordinary life, the more it's grounded to how we are just making the choice that's in front of you better, the more it's able to be in service to ordinary life. Then it is woven back into liveliness.

Not in the space where we bring things into sorcery surface from the top down. From the simulated top down which gets in the way of our relationship with the top. That distinction strikes me as being a fundamental distinction at this moment: the distinction between sorcery and theoria, or the distinction you made in practice. The distinction of weaving our potency and relationship with meaningfulness within relationship with life. The actual life that you're living moment to moment, bring it into service of that first and keep it at that level of scale. Don't do the sorcerer's apprentice thing and avoid the sorcerer's apprentice thing at all costs.

Once you've become capable of bringing a higher degree of beauty and aliveness in the relationships that are directly in front of you, then expand. Build that capacity. If it turns out that your moment of living kairos properly is to bring something in service to the logos in a powerful way, then do what is yours to do. Probably still practice to do it artfully in a very powerful way.

I think that's probably a great way to finish this. You're totally right, and it wraps up the things we're saying. We have a certain amount of capacity to affect the world. If we think of hyper-agents, the closest one you'll deal with is your family. You can build that into something that isn't parasitic and is together in higher participation. Maybe that's the best thing we can do.

Apart from that, for almost all beings alive today, the closest hyper-agent is yourself. Bringing all these broken processes within you together, then after that, it's with your close people.

Thanks for this conversation. I'd like to continue it and have more because I think this is the question everybody is thinking about and asking. I need some time to think about what we talked about today, but I would like to continue if you agree.

I'll end with a provocation: The advice you both made is good, but we also need to get people into a relationship with people other than their family and friends. This is the notion of fellowship. Part of the fellowship is the communion of the saints. If Plato and Socrates can't enter and be part of my family, then I'm kind of doomed. I'm not rejecting the advice you gave, but I'm turning it into a provocation.

There's a beautiful way of synthesizing that, which is to remember that the word family means "those who love most."

I'll give my last provocation: That's why I tell people to go to church.

Thank you both. This has been wonderful, and we'll definitely set up future conversations. I really felt the logos coming into the conversation very powerfully. Thank you both very much.